There are really two sets of tax laws in this country. One is for employees; it allows deductions for normal employee items, such as individual retirement accounts, 401(k)s (if you have one set up by your company), interest and property taxes on your home, and charity. Then there are the laws for small and home-based business people who conduct their business either full or part time. In addition to the tax deductions employees can get, small business people can deduct, with proper documentation, their house, their spouses (by hiring them), their business vacations, their cars, and food with colleagues. They can also set up a pension plan that makes any government plan seem paltry by comparison and deduct most of their “vacation” trips if they combine them with an appropriate amount of business. Moreover, under the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, small businesses and independent contractors can now effectively pay tax on only 80 percent of their net income from their business (not counting investment earnings). You will never get rich until you learn to get your taxes down to the legal minimum.There are two tax systems in this country— one for salaried employees, one for small/ home-based business owners.A home-based business will make you better off than a second income. Traditional job security has declined over the years and will continue to do so, making home businesses more attractive.You will probably save $2,000 – $10,000 per year by starting your own part-time business.3The example below shows how a woman named Lori, who earned a $20,000 salary, took home only $1,001 after she deducted all her work-related expenses. Yet she could have netted the entire $20,000 had she earned it in a home-based business. This is an increase of almost 18 times her take-home pay as an employee. It illustrates why having more than one job in a family does not produce any major effect on most people’s bank accounts because of the tax laws. Let’s assume a husband earned $40,000 per year, which is $3,400 per month, and his wife (I’m calling her Lori) wasn’t working. They had more month than money. (Sound familiar?) Lori subsequently got an administrative job for $20,000 per year. When examining the economics of getting this extra income for the family, the results were startling! Lori had to pay federal and state taxes on her new income. Since they filed jointly, the family’s combined income was what established their tax bracket. She paid $4,845 in new federal and state taxes, most of which were nondeductible. Lori had Social Security withheld from her paycheck at the rate of 7.65 percent, which amounted to an additional nondeductible amount of $1,530 being extracted from her. She also had to commute to work 10 miles a day round trip, which is probably conservative for most people. This results in nondeductible commuting costs of $1,337 in 2022.1 Lori also had child care expenses that give a partial tax credit. Quinn figured that the amount spent over and beyond the tax credit was $6,250 per year. Lori also ate out each day with colleagues, spending an average of $7 per day for lunch, five days per week. This results in a nondeductible expense of $1,750 a year. (I would love to know where she ate for only $7!) Now that Lori has a job, she has to have better clothing and much more dry cleaning. Let’s assume Lori’s increased expenses here were an extra $1,200 per year, nondeductible, of course. Finally, with both spouses working, Lori wasn’t in the mood to cook, somewhat akin to my own life. Thus, there were more convenience foods and more eating out. This resulted in increased food costs of a nondeductible $2,000 per year at the minimum. Add it all up and Lori’s take-home pay was a paltry $1,001 a year, for which she had to put up with the commute and the boss and the corporate hassles. The recent COVID-19 pandemic and resulting shift to working at home for a large portion of the population has only increased this trend, and it looks like it will continue to become one of the greatest mass movements in the U.S. If Lori started a home-based business, she would not be spending dramatically more money then she is currently spending. She would eat out anyway, go on trips, and have the same car expenses for repairs, gas, and insurance as she did before. If she has a home-based and/or consulting business, however, many of her expenses become deductible. This concept is known as “redirecting expenses.” With a home-based or consulting business, she can now deduct some of the expenses that she is incurring anyway. More Reasons to Start a Home-Based Business In recent years, the era of large corporate profits and economic growth came to an end. Moreover, many economists believe things won’t be getting better any time soon. Remember the American Dream? You worked hard for one employer, saved your money, and retired with dignity and security. Today, young and middle-aged alike are realizing that their dream of having a job with a company forever is an illusion. Just pick up any national paper and you will see companies downsizing, rightsizing, and capsizing. (Remember Enron and WorldCom.) If this isn’t bad enough, under the 2017 tax reforms business expenses and higher Social Security tax limits. This results in more couples working than ever before and, on many occasions, working at more than one job. It is now almost impossible to have only one job in the family and make ends meet! Finally, with both spouses away from the home most of the day, we have more children fending for themselves until their parents get home and less discipline in the home. (I wonder if some of the shootings that occur in school today aren’t caused, in part, because many parents aren’t home to take care of their children and supervise them properly.) The reasons so many people are going into a home-based business or becoming consultants rather than joining a traditional business are many. There is no commute (unless you have a really big home), no boss, little if any chance of lawsuits, much less overhead, and no employees or very few employees. In addition, the new tax law effectively reduces the tax on net business income or on income earned by contractors to 80 percent of their net business income. It is for these reasons, according to Entrepreneur Magazine, that 95 percent of the home-based businesses succeed in their first year and achieve an average income of $50,250 per year, with many earning much more. I should note that, in addition to all the benefits noted above, Congress will subsidize you while you’re growing your small business. If your business produces a loss in the first year or so, you can use that loss against any other income that you have. It can be used against wages earned as an employee, dividends, pensions, or interest income, or against your spouse’s earnings if you filed a joint return. If the tax loss exceeds all your and your spouse’s income for the year, no problem. If the loss exceedsStrategy If you don’t have a home-based or small business, start one immediately!your income, you can now carry forward all business losses forever and use these losses to offset up to 80 percent of your future taxable income until the losses are used up. Yes, you read this correctly, the losses can be carried forward forever. Example: Mike earns $50,000 in a job with the government. If he starts a home-based business that generates a tax loss of $10,000, he pays tax on only $40,000. In fact, if everyone in America who is employed full-time got a part-time business and used the strategies suggested in this book, each employee could easily reduce his or her taxes from $2,000 to $10,000 or more each year. If all the employees and small business people applied this information, the tax bite in the U.S. would be reduced by a whopping estimated $300 billion each year. (Of course, Congress would have to change the laws if this occurred.) Finally, I want to note that you should not set up a business just to save taxes. Tax savings should be the icing and not the cake. Otherwise, you could run afoul of the hobby loss statutes. What Types of Businesses Should I Consider? This is one of the questions asked most frequently of me. Actually, starting a business is not as hard as most people think. In most cases, there is little or no licensing required and you can operate it out of your home with few or no overhead costs. The key is deciding what type of business is right for you. The best business for most people is the one that excites them and/or about which they have substantial knowledge. Consider the things that you are good at or really like to do. Consider your hobbies. I know one person who became an antique dealer because he and his wife loved collecting antiques. Perhaps you like writing and want to be a freelance writer or freelance editor. Tutoring and training such as giving SAT lessons or music lessons from the home are becoming fast-growing businesses. Many people become distributors of products or services out of their homes. If you are good with people, you should also consider one of the many good network marketing companies. Why? These companies have proven products and sales literature and you usually don’t have to store or finance inventory or even ship it to customers. The company does all that for you. It will even give you an account of all your sales and of all your distributors’ (downline) sales. There is no overhead, such as rent and employees, so there’s no liability exposure, which can occur in traditional businesses. Moreover, just about every product that you can think of is currently being marketed using the network marketing approach. In addition, most network marketing companies provide some form of residual income that provides a continual stream of income from your distributors from year to year and month to month. Finally, you get the same or even better tax benefits with network marketing than you would with any traditional business. Hot Tip You can probably save $2,000–$10,000 a year by starting your own part-time business. The only downside to network marketing is that some of these operations are shaky. If you go this route, you want to associate with a company that has been around a while and has a proven track record of success and proven marketing programs. Many of these companies have a very high failure rate within the first two years of operation. I would recommend that you consider only companies that have been around and continuously successful for at least two years. Check out the various distributors that you want to be associated with. You want successful people who will teach you and support you. Your best friend may or may not be the ideal person. Research has constantly shown that it is rarely the business that determines success or failure. It is usually the business owner. Why does one person succeed and another fail at the same business? Two words: knowledge and action. Some people want the benefits of having their own business, but they don’t take action. The result is business failure. Then there are the people who are always working. They take action all day but still fail. The reason is that they are not taking the correct actions, the knowledgeable actions that will bring the desired results. Again, the result is business failure. It’s like drilling for oil. If you set up a drilling rig in your backyard, it’s going to fail to produce oil unless your backyard is in Texas or Alaska. The same rig in a good oil field will produce a gusher because it was placed where oil was known to exist. The point is that most people who start businesses or become consultants do so without all the necessary knowledge. Consequently, many people quit before they acquire through experience the knowledge that they need—and also without realizing that they are getting substantial tax breaks. The choice between being rich and being poor, for you and for millions of others, is the opportunity that starting your own consulting or small business offers. If you have one going already, then you need to make sure that you’re enjoying the many tax advantages your brilliance in so doing offers you. Job prospects are declining and will continue to do so.You will never get rich unless you get your tax affairs down to the legal minimum.There are two tax systems in this country: one is for employees and one is for small businesses, consultants, and home-based businesses.Everyone should have a home-based business immediately! Notes 1. This allowed figure for 2022 is 58.5 cents per mile from January 1 to June 30, and 62.5 cents per mile from July 1 to December 31. 2. This assumes a two-week vacation. Strategy Get LUCK— Labor Under Correct KnowledgHow to Deduct Your Meals and Some Employee OutingsTaxes are the price that we pay for civilization. —Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. I’m proud to be paying taxes in the United States. The only thing is, I could be just as proud for half the money. —Arthur Godfrey. It deals with deducting your meals and audit-proofing your records for the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). It also will cover some exceptions that most people and even most accountants don’t even know about. It will apply to you if you have a small business but also if your job requires you to entertain prospects or subordinates in order to obtain more business or to help motivate employees. Prior to 2018, small businesses could deduct 50 percent of meals and 50 percent of their entertainment and fun. In fact, both were always treated the same under tax law, which is why we accountants spoke of “mealsandentertainment” as if they were one and the same. Deduct your meals.Learn when you need a receipt and when the IRS doesn’t require receipts.Deduct theater tickets, golf, plays, and other associated entertainment.Deduct season tickets.Know when a spouse’s meals would be deductible.Know how to audit-proof all entertainment for the IRS.Deduct home entertainment.Learn about a special exception for parties at home.Learn how to deduct large parties without ever discussing business.Provide lunches for employees.Deduct business club dues and dues to civic organizations.Find out about the “sales seminar at home” exception.8Starting in 2023, all of this changed! All deductions for entertainment have been eliminated. Thus, you can no longer deduct fun activities with clients and prospects such as movies, plays, theater, sporting events, and golf. Sandy’s note: I wonder what the NFL and NBA will do with their box seats and whether firms will still rent them. Before I get into the meals deduction, I want to discuss a question that comes up frequently in my seminars, which is, “When do I have to keep receipts?” The IRS has been very taxpayer-friendly lately with respect to receipts. No receipts are needed for entertainment expenses under $75 per expensExample: John takes Mary out for a prearranged lunch and discusses business. John spends $25 on pretzels. (Hopefully, they’re good pretzels!) John does not need a receipt because the cost of the entertainment is under $75. Example: If John spent $85 for lunch, which includes drinks, he then would need a receipt. Although you technically don’t need meal receipts for under $75, I would keep them anyway. IRS agents love seeing receipts, and it will avoid most problems. If you lose a receipt or forgot to get one, you can always use this IRS regulation in an audit. Meals: Under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, Congress carved out various categories for deductions for meals. While meals were normally limited to 50 percent, there were some exceptions that allowed a 100 percent deduction for meals. Here is a handy comprehensive chart for you to use in understanding the new, more complicated rules:Business Meals and Entertainment 2018 Deduction Amount 100% 50% Zero Entertainment with clients & prospects XYear-end party for customers XGolf, spa, sporting event, or theatre with customer XType 1 Meals with clients or prospects* X Meals with your business partner, officers, or directors* XType 2 Meals while traveling outside of a normal commute X Meals while traveling away from home overnight XType 3 Employee meals for convenience of employer X Employee meals for required business meeting X Meal paid for at Chamber of Commerce meeting X Food in the office for employees (e.g., donuts & coffee)† XYear-end party for employees and spouses† X Team building recreational activity with employees† X Type 4 Meals for general public at marketing presentation X Food at “open house” when selling property X Food as a cost of goods sold in your business (ie. restaurant) X* On 1/25/18, Veena Murthy, legislation counsel for the Joint Committee on Taxation said that under the TCJA, “There is still a 50% deduction permitted for meals. That is generally the case. However, meals that are considered entertainment are no longer deductible.” † Employees are defined as non-owners, non-officers, non-directors, or non-highly compensated employees. For example, the majority of those attending a year-end party, team building activity, or eating the in-office food, must be employees as defined in the preceding sentence.Under the 2020 Cares Act, in 2021 and 2022, you can deduct 100 percent of the cost of meals that you have with prospects or incur while on business travel AS LONG AS you purchased your meals from a restaurant or a caterer. You don’t have to eat your meal with your prospects at the restaurant. It only has to be purchased from the restaurant. Thus, if you get Chinese take-out from Greasy Lloyd’s and meet with your prospect in your home, you can deduct 100 percent of the food if you have a business meeting and document it correctly. In the case that business meals are combined with entertainment, only the meal portion would be deductible. If there is no separation between the expense for the meal and that of the entertainment, none of the cost would be deductible. Here are some examples that should explain this: Example: Jim entertains a prospect at a baseball game, paying for both the tickets and food. The food would be totally deductible if it was deemed ordinary and necessary to his business (i.e., he had a business discussion prior to or after the game). However, the cost of the game would not be deductiblExample: Jim has a sky box that sends him one combined bill for both the game and the food provided to the skybox. Since the bill doesn’t state what portion is food, the entire cost would be non-deductible. If you buy your food from a place other than a restaurant, such as a grocery market, and talk business over the meal with a prospect, the food would be 50 percent deductible. Meals are also fully deductible when they are in connection with marketing or promotional events, or they are related to recreational or social events for employers such as a company picnic or holiday party. Example: S and B, Inc., has a company-wide Christmas party for all of its employees. If meals are supplied by a caterer, the entire cost of the food is deductible. Documentation required for meals and business gifts: There are several legal requirements for you to deduct your meals with prospects. First, tax law requires that a business meal be arranged for the purpose of conducting business or for acquiring business. Your prospect must reasonably expect a business reason for the meaExample: Sam went to Greasy Lloyd’s Restaurant for lunch and happened to discuss business with the waitress. This would not be a deductible business meal because Sam didn’t have business intent to meet with the waitress, nor did she reasonably expect to discuss business with Sam as part of the lunch. Example: Let’s assume the same facts as above, but the waitress was Sam’s neighbor and told Sam to stop by the restaurant where they could discuss Sam’s services as a financial consultant. As part of the discussion, Sam also orders lunch while he is talking with her. This would be a deductible business meal because this was clearly a prearranged meeting with an actual business discussion. Strategy 1 Discuss specific business when you eat.A second requirement is that you must discuss business before, during, or after a business meal to qualify for the business meal deductioThis was put in because before the 1986 Tax Reform Act, you could have a quiet business meal and not say anything. As long as your prospect was a legitimate prospect, this meal was deductible. The law was changed to require you to discuss some specific business. The key is that you must have and document a clear and specific business discussion. The third requirement is that the meal must take place in surroundings conducive to a business discussion. The IRS presumes that the active business discussion requirement is not met if the business meal occurs under circumstances in which there is little or no possibility of engaging in businesEating dinner in a nightclub with a continuous floorshow is an example of a nonbusiness setting; the same would be true for a large cocktail partFood purchased at the theater would not be a business meal either. The final requirement is that you must substantiate your meal adequately even if a receipt is not requireHere are the exact six questions that you will need to audit-proof your meal forever:9Who was entertained (business relationship)? The IRS wants you to identify the person or persons entertained, with names, occupations, official titles, and other corroborative information to establish the business relationship.Where did the business meal take place? The nature and place of the entertainment (dinner at Greasy Lloyd’s) must be described. When a charge slip or receipt is obtained, the nature and place usually are self-evident.When did the business meal take place? The definition of time is usually the date when the entertainment takes place. When entries are made in a diary-type of document, the date on the diary page is adequate support for time.Why did the business meal take place (business purpose)? Of the five elements, this is the most important. State the exact nature of the business discussion or activity. Be brief but specific—very specific. If you simply say “prospect” or “goodwill,” this will not be enougYou must be more specific. For example, it would be good enough if you said, “Tried to get a listing or referral,” “Talked about using my services,” “Talked about disability insurance needs or financial needs,” or “Talked about opportunity or healthcare needs.”What type of meals or expense was involved? Was it for breakfast, lunch, or dinner, or for drinks? Was it a business gift, or was the expense for employee seminars etc.?How much did the meal cost? The cost of the entertainment must be recorded someplace. As I noted earlier, when the cost is $75 or more, you must retain documentary evidence, such as a receipt, voucher, or credit-card copy. There is also one other requirement for all entertainment expenses that was not included in the preceding list. You must record the answers to these six IRS questions in a timely fashion, which means at or near the time of the expenditure11 in some kind of notebook, diary, or tax organizer. You don’t need to do this daily, but the closer in time you document your deductions, the better IRS agents will like iFigure2-1. Documentationofabusinessmeal. If you follow everything that I noted above, you will never have to worry about an IRS audit. You will have peace of mind in the face of any audit. I have found that if people don’t have something to trigger them to write down these things each day after each expense, they forget to do it, which results in no deduction. A tax diary or organizer is not only required by the IRS but also quite useful. Think of a tax diary as audit insurance or life insurance. An interesting case happened when I was working at the IRS. There was a consultant who was being audited for his 1985 expenses in 1987. His accountant told him that he needed to keep some form of tax organizer. He thus converted his appointment book into a diary by backdating all his mileage and entertainment and travel questions using six pens of different colors. Some of the pages looked like they were dragged through the mud. Agatha Christie would have been proud! However, he made one mistake: He used a 1987 diary for his 1985 expenses! Don’t wait until you get audited. Get into the habit of filling out a tax organizer or daily diary, and you will save thousands—and you will have that peace of mind of never worrying about an IRS audit. Generally, Congress and the IRS want you to discuss business in surroundings conducive to a business discussion. Thus, when you discuss business at a theater, on a golf course, and in a nightclub, this is not deemed conducive surroundingNot only should you keep track of your business meals, but I recommend that you keep track of any expenditures incurred for entertaining a business prospect even though the entertainment is no longer deductible. Why? First, everyone should keep track of their business expenditures regardless of the deductibility of these expenses in order to track where their money has been spent. Moreover, tracking expenses incurred for business will help in establishing that you are conducting your business like a business and not like a hobby. Charity Events There is one interesting IRS twist to this: If you buy tickets for a charitable event, you are not limited to the face value of the ticket if the following three conditions apply:14The event is organized for the primary purpose of benefiting a tax-exempt charity.All the net proceeds of the event are contributed to the charity.The event uses volunteers for substantially all the work performed in carrying out the event. Thus a charitable golfing event where all the net funds raised go to the Heart Fund or the United Way, for example, would be a qualifying event. (I should note that no matter how needy you may feel that you are, you, personally, are not a qualifying charity.) One big question that most people have is whether they can deduct the cost of a meal alone with a spouse. The answer is very clear-cut: Absolutely not! The IRS has what is known as a “closely connected” spouse rule. At least the government acknowledges that your spouse is closely connected to you. This rule prevents you from deducting meals out alone with your spouse. Is there a way to deduct the cost of a spouse? The answer is yes! The closely connected spouse rule allows you to bring your spouse and deduct his or her costs whenever you are entertaining another couplIn other words, if your business guest brings a spouse or a guest, you are entitled to bring yourIn addition, if you are not married, you may bring your “significant friend” to help entertain the other couple. Naturally, you must be entertaining the business guest during the ordinary course of your business, and you must meet the business discussion and documentation requirements that I noted earlier in this chapter. I guess that if you are single but living with someone or dating someone, this would be classified as the “closely connected significant friend rule.”Strategy 2 Deduct for feeding and entertaining your spouse.In case you are curious as to why this deduction for your spouse or significant friend is allowed when your guest has a companion, the rationale for this distinction is that your spouse or significant friend can keep the companion busy while you have a one-on-one conversation with your guest. The key is to note in your tax organizer or diary the name of the other couple and what you discussed. Moreover, this rule can be carried another step. If the other couple brings their children, you probably could bring your kids to keep the prospect’s kids busy. This is probably one of the least understood areas for most people and even for accountants. In fact, when I have lectured to accountants and ask about this, very few have heard of this issue. The general rule is that if you pay for the meal for you and your guest(s), you can deduct 50 percent of the total cost of the meal. If you split the bill, you could presumably deduct 50 percent of your share of the bill. The IRS may at its whim invoke the Sutter rule. The Sutter rule allows the IRS to disallow a portion of your business meals when such meals absorb substantial amounts of your typical living expenseThere was a case that a former IRS colleague had that involved a doctor who claimed $35,000 in meals in one year. This doctor was the biggest example of what we CPAs call the “P-I-G rule.” His lawyer argued at a hearing that “he only eats for business reasons.” Obviously, all his deductions were disallowed under the Sutter rule. Practically speaking, IRS doesn’t try to impose the Sutter rule unless you are deducting a lot of meals for entertainment. Also, it is questionable whether it is still applicable since Congress changed the entertainment deduction from 100 percent to 50 percent to take into account that there was some “personal element” in entertainment. Thus, you may be able to argue that the Sutter rule does not apply due to the congressional action taken to reduce the deduction for entertainment. Exceptions to the 50 Percent Deduction Rule After 2022, the normal rule, as shown above, is that you can only deduct 50 percent of business meals. However, there are a couple of exceptions to the 50 percent rule for deducting meals. In these exceptions, you can deduct 100 percent of the meal cost. Employee year-end events and recreational parties with employees are 100 percent deductible. Realtor’s open houses are considered promotion and are likewise 100 percent deductible. Meals served at sales or marketing seminars are 100 percent deductiblTravel agents would be another example of people who would fall into this category on some expenses. If you were a travel agent and went to various cities to check out the hotels, restaurants, accommodations, and meeting facilities, you would be able to deduct all your expenses and not be subject to the 50 percent rule. Obviously, it would be important to document that you send clients to these places Strategy 3 Avoid the Sutter rule. Strategy 4 Some entertainment can be deemed business promotion.on vacations, document who you met with (such as the director of catering or the convention service), document that you had made some appointments in advance to meet with these people, etc. Tax law limits your maximum deduction to $25 for business gifts to any one person during the yeaThis limitation applies to gifts of tangible personal property and not money,20 and even worse, a husband and wife are deemed to be one taxpayer for purposes of the $25 limiNote: Gifts of food items where the business owner, partner or company employee isn’t present aren’t deductible according to a recent IRS notice. If you want to deduct a meal with clients or prospects, a company employee or owner must be present during the meal discussion. Example: Alan, a consultant, gives a client a housewarming gift of flowers and a giant vase that cost him $300. He may deduct only $25 of the cost of this business gift. Ugh! One interesting exception is that gifts made to a business where there is no single person designated to receive or benefit from the gift have no limiExample: I do a lot of programs for Tony Robbins’ Wealth Mastery seminars. Every year I send to the marketing department and the production department of Robbins Research big vases of flowers that cost several hundred dollars each. Since they are sent to each department without mentioning any names, the entire cost of the baskets is deductible and not subject to the $25 limitation. As a result of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, gifts or meals are no longer allowed if you are not presenYou are entitled to a tax deduction for a business meal only if you are present during the meaWithout question, the most overlooked type of entertainment is home entertainment. This is just as deductible as having a business meal in a restaurant and in some cases even more deductible. 25 Your home is already deemed to be a setting conducive to a business discussion. If you have a couple in your home for dinner, it’s easy to have a one-on-one conversation. You do not need to spend more time trying to conduct business than you spend on entertaining your guestIn fact, there’s no time limit for the business discussion. Example: Sam and Mary entertain Bob and Alice. Sam has a five-second discussion about getting referrals, and the party lasts four hours. Bob may deduct the cost of the party. There is no time limit to the business discussion. Moreover, if you entertain at home and have only a few people for dinner, you probably won’t spend more than $75 and thus won’t need a receipt. You have to discuss business to deduct any meals. Here’s one suggestion that I give: Most people will start out the discussion with some variation of “How’s business?” You should respond, “Business is unbelievable,” because thisStrategy 5 Deduct your meals at home business presentations.Hot Tip Don’t have all your home entertainment be $74.99!response covers the state of your business either way! However, you need to add one other line, which is, “However, I never have enough business” or “I never have enough referrals” or “I never have enough clients.” This is quick and to the point, and it suffices as an appropriate business discussion if it’s clear that you’re asking for business or referrals. Your home business meal deductions are secure when you discuss specific business with guestYou don’t even need to discuss business with your spouse or closely connected significant friends to deduct them toKeep the guest list small (fewer than 12 people). Then you can talk to everyone with whom you need to discuss business. With small groups, you can easily discuss business with everyone there. When you invite 12 people or more to your home, you will be hard-pressed to prove to the IRS that you had specific business discussions with everyone in attendance. Therefore, you must establish some other type of commercial motivation. It’s not that you can’t talk business with everyone and document this fact in your diary. It’s just that it would be difficult to do. One approach to this problem is to display products on the wall. If you entertain a group for the purpose of showing a display of your business products or services, commercial motivation generally is deemed to be clearly establisheWhen you combine the display of products with an invitation that invites the guests for a specific business reason, you greatly improve your chances for deductibilitIt is also best that you have little social or personal relationship with the guests—the less social the betteOne note of caution if you want to deduct business meals incurred at home entertainment: Never, never combine a personal event with a business meal event. A birthday party for your 10-year-old with business guests in attendance won’t cut the mustard with the IRThe bottom line is that home entertainment, especially when large groups are involved, is deductible only when you can firmly establish a business motivExample: Wanda (I’ve changed the person’s name for privacy reasons), a real estate professional, invited 100 people over to her home for cocktails to celebrate being in real estate 20 years. This establishes a business agenda for the party. At the party, she has a buffet with pictures of properties above the food. She then has her husband take a picture of people looking at the displays while they’re getting their food. This establishes a clear business setting and motive. Finally, when she goes shopping, she obtains two receipts from the grocery store: one for the party food and one for the general household. She staples them together and labels which is which. She clearly would be allowed to deduct the entire cost of the party (multiplied by the 50 percent limitation). Normally, food provided in your home as part of a business discussion is only 50 percent deductible, as with the general rule for meals deductions. However, food served at a seminar would be an exception to the rule—100 percent deductiblInStrategy 6 Give small parties at home.Strategy 7 Deduct meals for large groups.Strategy 8 Give sales seminars and presentations in your home.addition, there was a tax court decision35 that noted that all food and beverages served to prospects are 100 percent deductible if provided at home during a sales presentation or sales seminar. Example: Juan holds sales presentations in his home for his network marketing business. If Juan provides food and drinks, he may deduct 100 percent of the cost of this entertainment. The key to this 100 percent deduction is documentation. Again, you have to show the who, where, when, why, and how much of the entertainment, as discussed earlier. You should note in your diary or tax organizer who attended (or have your guests sign a register), the date, what was discussed, what was served, and the cost of the food. The reasonable cost of providing social or recreational parties for employees, year-end holiday parties, or a summer outing that is primarily for employees and their families is 100 percent deductiblYou must, however, invite all employees. No discrimination is alloweThus, if you have several workers and have a year-end celebration that they, their families, and you and your spouse attend, you may deduct the whole cost of the party. If it were just you and your spouse, it would not be deductible. The key is that the social outing be primarily for employees rather than for the owners and their families. If you have any employees, you may provide lunches to your staff on a tax-free basis if you provide lunch for over half the employees and any one of the following conditions holds:38 1. There is a short lunch period39 (generally no more than 45 minutes in length). 2. The employees are available for emergencies (such as ambulance services) 3. There are insufficient eating facilities nearby. Also, meals must be furnished on normal workdayYou deduct dues paid to business clubs when such payment is in the ordinary and necessary course of businesThe terms ordinary and necessary mean that the expenses are customary, usual or normal, and helpful or appropriate. Dues to your local Chamber of Commerce almost always would be appropriatDues paid to your professional societies, such as the Board of Realtors, Life Underwriters, enrolled agents societies, consultant societies, etc., are deductiblTrade association dues also would be deductible if the association’s purpose is the furthering of the business interests of its memberDues to community clubs organized to attract tourists and new members to your locality are deductiblDues to civic organizations such as the Rotary Club, Kiwanis, and Lions Club are deductiblA good tax tracker or diary appthat I would recommend is Hurdlr. It not only requires what you need to be fully compliant but also is one of the few trackers that will read receipts and automatically insert most of the required questions. You can get Hurdlr from the App Store (iOS) or the Google Play (Android). Strategy 9 Give parties for employees.Strategy 10 Provide lunches for employees.Strategy 11 Deduct dues to business and civic organizations. Country Club and Health Club Dues As a result of the 2017 TCJA, Congress eliminated the deduction for country clubs and health clubHowever, strange as it may seem, you can get a deduction for these kinds of clubs if the company reimburses the employees for the dues to the extent that they are used for business as a working-condition fringe benefit. Example: Cornell’s consulting company provides Peter with a country club membership worth $20,000, which he does not record as compensation. If he substantiates that 60 percent of the time that he uses the club is for business, he may exclude 60 percent of the $20,000 cost of the club and be taxed on only $8,000. Cornell’s company may deduct the entire cost of the membership. I should note that this would work for your employees regardless of what entity you conduct your business under and should work for you if you are incorporated. The key here is documentation. You must show when you or your employee used the club and to what extent it was used to entertain prospects and discuss business. A tax diary or tax organizer is a necessity here. A little documentation goes a long way. Regardless of the deductibility or nondeductibility of the club dues, any meal would be deductible (at 50 percent) if you discuss business during the meal. Again, the key is documentation and writing down the five elements of substantiation. Strategy 1: Discuss specific business when you eat—and document everything with the five elements of documentation—who, where, when, why, and how much.Strategy 2: Deduct for feeding and entertaining your spouse.Strategy 3: Avoid the Sutter rule.Strategy 4: Some entertainment can be deemed business promotion.Strategy 5: Deduct your meals at home business presentations.Strategy 6: Give small parties at home.Strategy 7: Deduct meals for large groups.Strategy 8: Give sales seminars and presentations in your home.Strategy 9: Give parties for employees.Strategy 10: Provide lunches for employees.Strategy 11: Deduct dues to business and civic organizations. The politicians’ promises of yesterday are the taxes of today. Read my lips, no new taxes. I have no intention of raising taxes. At my seminars people often ask whether they can deduct their meals while eating alone. The answer is yes, if you are on business travel, because that will allow a deduction for meals for each day that you are traveling on business. So, when are you traveling on business? You are on business travel, according to the IRS, when you are traveling from home, overnight, or for a period of time sufficient to require sleep. For example, assume that you live in Washington, DC, fly to New York City in the morning, and return that evening. You would not be deemed on business travel since you were not away from home overnight on —Mackenzie King —George H. W. Bush —Bill Clinton. Understand when you are on business travel.Understand the difference between business transportation and “on the road” expenses.Know how to deduct your spouse’s or significant friend’s expenses to any business convention and have the IRS bless those expenses.Know how you can maximize your business car usage with conventions travel, especially when you take family members with you on the trip.Understand the IRS dry cleaning rule.Learn how to avoid the congressional trap of taking courses on the wrong ships!Learn how to deduct the expenses for all weekends without doing any work on the weekendbusiness. The IRS would classify this trip to New York as a non-travel trip. On this trip you would be allowed to deduct only your transportation costs of getting to the citAlthough the IRS doesn’t specifically state that you must sleep overnight on your business trip, for all practical purposes, this is usually required. You may be able to get around this if you take a daily trip to a job location for several weeks that might be 170 miles away, for examplIn this situation, even if you didn’t sleep overnight somewhere, the IRS may deem this to be business travel. However, to save yourself any uncertainty or challenge, you are better off sleeping somewhere overnight. I call this the “strange bed” rule. I encourage people who want to establish “business travel” status to stay overnight in a strange bedconducting business. This can be a hotel, a friend’s home, or a family member’s home. The key is that you rarely stay there and that you are sleeping at your business location. Notice, however, that it doesn’t have to be in a hotel. If you choose to stay with friends or a relative, this would be “staying overnight,” as long as you were on a business trip with a business motive. You should document in your tax organizer where you stayed and deduct any out-of-pocket expenses that you incurred. I should note that there is no geographic limit to the business travel. For example, I gave a seminar in Gaithersburg, Maryland, that is about six minutes from my home. However, I stayed in the hotel the evening before the meeting to avoid potential car and traffic problems. I was considered to be on business travel. I should note at this juncture that there is a lot of confusion between transportation expenses and on-the-road expenses. Many people and many accountants seem to combine this under one set of rules. However, they are treated differently; each category has its own separate rule base. It is possible to take a business trip where transportation expenses are not deductible but on-the-road expenses are deductible. What are the differences? Transportation expenses are those costs that you incur in getting to and from your destination. The actual cost of your airfare or car costs, if you drove to your destination, would come under this category. The on-the-road expenses include all costs necessary to sustain life while on your triThese expenses comprise lodging, meals, laundry, dry cleaning, and similar expenseNot only are your dry cleaning and laundry expenses deductible while you are on business travel, but you can deduct the first laundry and dry cleaning expenses you incur when you get home as long as your clothing was soiled on the business trip. You do not need to get your clothes dry-cleaned and laundered while away on the tri.(Cont.)Learn about four time-tested reasons to deduct most business trips anywhere in the world.Learn how to audit-proof your travel expenses for the IRS.The tax law rule is that, for every day you are on business travel, you may deduct 100 percent of your on-the-road expenses8 but only 50 percent of your meal costAn example will illustrate this. Example: Allison incurs the following on-the-road costs while on business travel: $400 for hotels $50 for dry cleaning $20 in tips $300 in food She may deduct all of the hotels, dry cleaning, and tips but only $150 of the meal costs, which are limited to 50 percent. You may not, however, deduct the cost of any entertainment in which there was no business motive or prospectinThus, if you were to go to a movie alone while on the business trip, the movie would not be deductible. (Darn!) Moreover, the IRS has a convenient ruling for travel-related receipts. The IRS has stated11 that you don’t need receipts for travel if the expenditure is less than $75 per expense. Example: Kim spends the following on her business trip: $6.00 for drinks on the plane $4.00 in skycap tips $6.95 for breakfast $12.00 for lunch $50.00 for a fabulous dinner $300.00 for airfare She would only need to keep a receipt for the airfare, which is the only expense that was $75 or more. She would, however, need to have to document these expenses in some diary or tax organizer. Strategies to Increase Travel Deductions and Add More Fun Hire your spouse or significant friend. If you want to take trips with your spouse or significant other and deduct the travel expenses for both of you, you must have a legitimate business reason for bringing along that persoIf he or she is in an entirely different business than you, taking your spouse to one of your business conventions would not result in tax deductions for your spouse. He or she would need to have a business reason for being on the trip, independent of being your spouse. If you want to take your spouse or significant friend on a business trip or to a convention, you can do so if he or she is licensed in your business (such as real estate or securities or insurance) or—and you will like this—can make money for you at the convention! But what does “make money for you” at the convention or on the business trip mean?Interestingly, Congress actually defined what this means:Your spouse or significant friend must be a bona fide employee of your business, andYour spouse or significant friend must be traveling for a bona fide business purpose, andThe expense would otherwise be deductible. Let’s examine what all this means to you. If your spouse helps in marketing, computer work, or management of your business, it certainly would be important to take him or her to a convention where courses were given in these areas. If your spouse is your accountant, on the other hand, you would not be able to take him or her to the convention unless there were some programs relating to what he or she does, such as tax planning. Take your business car for family travel. Tax law allows you to deduct the cost of your business triIf you travel with nonbusiness family members, you are allowed to deduct the cost that you would have incurred had you taken the trip alonSince traveling with a full car costs no more than traveling alone, all of your business car expenses are deductible, even if you have nonbusiness passengers. What this means is that you could deduct your gas and tolls and increase your business mileage for your car. For consultants and small business owners who normally don’t have a lot of business mileage on their vehicles (such as medical or legal professionals), this point of taking your car to a convention or out-of-town seminars becomes crucial. This one trip could increase your business use to a significant extent, which would allow you to depreciate a large portion of your vehicle and deduct a larger portion of some big expenses, such as insurance and repairs. Your deduction for various car expenses is a ratio of your business mileage to your total mileage. One out-of-town business trip could make a big difference. Lodging and meal expenses. One common question I get concerns lodging and meals. If you take someone on the trip, your food costs will be more and your room costs may be more than what you would have spent had you gone alone. The rule is that you deduct all of your costs as if you had taken the trip alonThus, if a motel costs $100 for one occupant and $120 for the family, you deduct $100. The $20 difference is a personal, nondeductible expense. What I recommend for documentation is either to ask the hotel what the single room rate would be or to remove the rate card from behind the door. (If you are ever in a room where the rate card is missing, I probably stayed in that room!) Drive 300 miles a day toward your business destination. The federal government reimburses IRS employees a full day’s per diem for each 300 miles of traveTake advantage of this rule. Plan your trips to cover 300 miles a day in direct route to your business destination. Each such day will count as a full business day and alsoallow you to deduct your on-the-road expenses for the day. This 300-mile rule also will determine the maximum amount of travel days that IRS will allow with your car. You would divide the amount of mileage for your trip by 300 and round up if there is a fraction. This will determine the maximum number of travel days allowed. Example: Tom drives 800 miles to a convention in Orlando, Florida. He takes his time in seeing the sights and takes 14 days to go the 800 miles. The IRS will allow only three business days as travel days (800/300). Take courses on U.S. cruise ships. There are a lot of organizations recently that are encouraging people to take courses on cruise ships with the promise of deductibility of those courses. Are all these claims true? The answer is clear-cut: it depends! If you’re looking for a vacation cruise ship subsidy, this is it—but only if you meet the four requirements below. You, and possibly your spouse, can deduct up to $2,000 each year for attending cruise ship conventions directly related to your business, provided:17The cruise ship is a registered U.S. vessel.All ports of call are in the U.S. or U.S. possessions.You submit two supporting statements with your tax return. One statement signed by you should give the days of transportation, number of hours of the trip, and the program of the scheduled business activity. In addition, you need a statement signed by an officer or official of the course or ship showing the number of hours of the business seminar and how many hours you attended.More than 50 percent of your total days should be spent on business. Thus, if the course is for one day but the cruise is for 14 days, you would not get a deduction for the cruise. See the discussion below on transportation. Make weekends deductible. How would you like to treat Saturday and Sunday as business days without ever working on the weekend? Believe it or not, you can treat weekends as business days—if you know what you are doing. Generally, because it’s so attractive, foreign travel has stricter rules than domestic traveIf you meet these rules, you will satisfy any IRS challenge and lock in your travel deductions. I will, therefore, focus on the foreign rules for deducting travel expenses, since this will protect you when traveling both in the U.S. and abroad. When you’re traveling to a foreign destination, you may count as business days all weekends and legal holidays that fall between business meeting dayThus, you want to sandwich your weekend days and/or holidays between business days. This is important to you for two reasons:You deduct all the on-the-road expenses for the weekend and holidayYou add these days for purposes of determining if your transportation expenses are deductible. Example: Thelma leaves for a business meeting in Hawaii on Thursday with a business meeting on both Friday and Monday and returns home on the following Tuesday night. Saturday and Sunday would be considered business days since they are sandwiched in between business days (Friday and Monday). If Friday or Monday is a federal holiday, you can sandwich the weekend and the holiday between business days. Thus, if the holiday is on a Monday, you would set up meetings on Friday and Tuesday, thus sandwiching in three days without doing any work on those three days. They would all be deemed business days for the on-the-road expenses and for transportation. We really have some great tax laws; it’s just that most people aren’t aware of them! A second approach to deducting weekends surprisingly comes from an unlikely source—the IRS! In a private ruling,21 the IRS allowed Saturday and Sunday to be considered business days if the costs of staying over were less than the savings on airfare of traveling after Saturday, which is usually the case. The following example will illustrate this point. Example: Thelma leaves for a convention in Hawaii on Sunday and would have returned home on Thursday, which would have cost her $1,200. If, however, she stays over in Hawaii Friday and Saturday and leaves on Sunday, her cost would be $400 (thus saving $800). As long as her food and lodging for Friday and Saturday and Sunday are less than $800, she may count Friday, Saturday, and Sunday as business days. She may also count as business days each convention day and each travel day. Count travel days as business days. This is an idea most people often overlook. Days in transit are considered business days provided that the travel to your business destination is by reasonably direct route and does not involve substantial nonbusiness diversionRemember that when a day is classified as a business day, you can deduct all your on-the-road costs for that day and the day is counted toward satisfying the business trip test for transportation, which will be discussed later. Example: Sam leaves New York for a convention in Vancouver, BC, on Thursday. He has a seminar on Friday and sets up referral meetings on Monday with various military base personnel. On Tuesday he leaves to return to New York; however, due to the time zone change, he doesn’t arrive until Wednesday. Thursday is a business day (travel). Friday is a business day (seminar). Saturday and Sundays are business days because they were sandwiched between business days. Monday was a business day because it was a workday. Tuesday and Wednesday are business days due to being travel days. Although you need to take a reasonably direct route, this requirement does not affect the mode of transportation that you use. Thus, you may take the trip by automobile, train, plane, or boaThus, even if flying to your Hawaii destination would have cost only $400, you could take a boat to Hawaii that costs $1,400. The cost is not relevant. There is, however, a special rule for luxury boats. The allowable deduction for cruise ships may not exceed twice the highest amount generally allowable per day to a lowranking White House employee traveling in the U.S. multiplied by the number of days on the shiIn addition, if you are simply using the cruise ship as a means of transportationto your business appointment or seminar, then it does not have to be a U.S. ship and you don’t need any signed statements, as you would if you took a course on the shiNote: Normally the highest federal per diem rate with the lower 48 states is found in Manhattan; however, this can change based on the time of the year changes from year to year. You need to do a search of per diem rates or ask your tax professional. It amazes me that someone would even bother to think about trivial guidelines like this. So much for tax simplification! Example: You take a six-day cruise from New York City to London on the Queen Mary 2. Your deduction may not exceed twice the highest federal per diem rate. If the highest federal per diem rate is $366, your deduction for a six-day trip may not exceed $4,392 per person ($732 per day × six days). Combine some fun with a business day without losing any deduction. If your presence is required at a particular place for a specific and bona fide business purpose, that day is counted as a business day, even if your presence is required for only part of the daThis applies even if you spend more time sightseeing during normal working hours than participating in business activitieThus, if you were to deliver a document to a client in Washington, DC, or attend a meeting that lasted 30 minutes, you could spend the rest of the time having fun in Washington. The key is to set up in advance at least one business appointment. Attend a convention or a seminar. If a convention or seminar has at least six hours of scheduled business activities during the day and you attend at least two-thirds of those activities, your day is considered a business daI call this the “four hour and one minute rule.” Thus, if you spend the majority of the working hours (generally four hours and one minute) pursuing your trade or business by attending a convention or seminar, the day is counted as a business day. When you are prevented from engaging in the conduct of your trade or business due to circumstances beyond your control, the day is still counted as a business day, even if you spend the day playing in the sand and enjoying the suExample: Todd was meeting a prospect in Hawaii with whom he had made an appointment in advance. If the prospect gets sick and cancels the meeting while Todd is in Hawaii, the entire day would still be deemed a business day. The same result would occur if Todd was expecting to fly home but the airline cancelled the flight because of mechanical difficulties and scheduled him to fly home the next day. Caretake your rental property. Necessary travel to caretake your rental property is deductiblThe key is that it must be necessary, which is determined by the facts and circumstances. If you collect the rents and actively participate in the day-to-day operations of the rental property, you will obviously have to take some trips to make sure that the property is in good condition. You will also have to check on rents in the area, make repairs, and speak with certain vendors.Even if you engage a management company to look after the property, you must check on their work. Are they maintaining the property? Is the rent reasonable? How do the tenants feel about the management company, and how does the company feel about the tenants? It could take several days to get the answers to all these questions and would certainly justify your trip. The key, again, is to document in your tax diary or tax organizer what you did and with whom you met. If you spend any days repairing and maintaining the property on a full-time basis, those days would be deemed business days and not personal dayMoreover, even if people related to you use the property for recreation on the same day, the day is not a personal daVisit colleagues and improve your skills and get referrals. The rationale is that you can learn new business skills from your colleagues. Therefore, you can design combined business and pleasure trips to make the rules work for you. Again, the key is to make appointments in advance and document them (with whom did you meet and for how long?). In addition, give a short description of the business discussion, such as “discussed sales or marketing techniques.” Example: You live in Washington, DC, and take a trip to Dallas, Phoenix, San Francisco, Denver, Minneapolis, and Pittsburgh. At each location, you spend a few days visiting with colleagues to learn new business skills or attempting to get referrals for any prospects who move to Washington, DC. You take the trip by automobile and drive at least 300 miles each or more each day toward the next visit. Assuming that you made no side trips for pleasure, all the days would be business days. You would deduct all of your on-the-road expenses and all days would be business days for the transportation deduction. Get educated out of town. Most people mistakenly believe that if a course is offered in your hometown it would be unreasonable to take the same course elsewhere, such as Hawaii. The fact is that you are allowed deductions for travel to and from educational facilities, meetings, seminars, and conventions that improve your business—regardless of where the events are helThus, if the exact same seminar is held both in your hometown and at a nice out-of-town resort, there is no requirement that you stay at home. At the Tax Reduction Institute, we always allow our participants to enroll in courses taken anywhere in the country or to transfer to any course and even encourage exotic locations. Famed speaker Tony Robbins takes this concept one step further: most of his courses and seminars are in Hawaii, Las Vegas, Florida, and Anaheim, California (where Disneyland is located). Nice planning, Tony! Hunt for a job anywhere in the U.S. The IRS allows deductions for all expenses directly related to a search for employment in the same trade or business. It makes no difference if the search is successful or unsuccessfuDo not take all your job-hunting trips to the same place every year! Also, to audit-proof a trip, you need documentation of your intention to search fora job prior to your trip. You should maintain in your files correspondence before the trip. In addition, you should maintain in your tax organizer or diary correspondence after the trip as to whom you met, when you met them, how long the meeting lasted, and a brief description of the discussion. Maximize your deductions for travel in the U.S. As was discussed, you are allowed to deduct on-the-road expenses for each day that you are on “business travel status.” Transportation, however, has a completely separate set of rules. As I discuss the rules, I encourage you to follow along on the flowchart. Understanding this chart will enable you to determine exactly how many days must be business days for you to deduct all of your transportation. 35 It is essential that your primary purpose of the trip be for business. Thus, you must have clear business intent before you leave for the trip. This is a crucial point that has caused a great deal of deductions to be lost without proper planning. You should document your intent by sending letters to confirm your appointments or keep copies of e-mails. You don’t need to have all your appointments set up in advance, but at least a few must be prearranged. Example: Connie is a network marketing consultant out of Sacramento, California. She wants to go to New York. She advertises for prospects in the New York Times and keeps a copy of the ad. She also sends confirming letters to her appointments, noting the day, time, and place for the meeting. This should be more than enough to satisfy the “intent” test. For trips within the U.S., your primary purpose must be for business. Although the courts and the IRS have based this on “facts and circumstances,”36 most cases interpret this to mean that you spend more than one-half your time attending to business and appointmentExample: Jim meets with some potential clients or distributors in Hawaii on Friday and Monday and returns home the following Friday. If he travels to Hawaii on Thursday, six days out of the nine would be business (Thursday and Friday for travel, Friday and Monday for work, and the weekend sandwiched between business days counts as business days). Since six out of nine is more than one-half, Jim may deduct all of his travel to Hawaii. However, because he has only six business days, he may deduct only those six days of his on-the-road expenses. Maximize your deductions for foreign travel. Like most things in tax law, there is very little simplification. Foreign travel has its own rules that make it different from domestic travel. The general rule is that when you leave the U.S., you can deduct your transportation as a ratio of business days to total dayThus, if you take a 13-day trip of which 8 were deemed business days, 8/13ths of your transportation would be deductible. There are, however, two notable exceptions to this rule where you would be able to deduct 100 percent of your transportation without spending 100 percent of your days on business. 39 The first exception is known as the one-week loophole. You’ll like this! Congress allows a 100 percent deduction for transportation even if you work on business only one or two days if you are back home within one week. Thus, if you have a meeting in London on Monday and you leave for that meeting the previous Sunday, you can deduct all of your transportation if you are back home by Saturday. If you leave on Saturday, you must be back home by Friday. Remember: This applies only to foreign trips and you must be home within one week to qualify for this exception.The second exception to the general rule for foreign travel is if your total business days equal or exceed 75 percent of the total days away from home, you may deduct 100 percent of your transportatioExample: Sue has some distributors in Italy. She spends 12 days away from home and meets with her distributors or provides seminars for them or their customers for eight days. If she has two travel days, she may deduct 100 percent of her transportation under this exception because she spent 75 percent or more of her days on business (eight work days and two travel days). Maximize your seminar and convention travel. The final type of trip that has its own rules is seminar and convention travel. As with the general rule for domestic travel, you can deduct a percentage of your transportation costs based on the ratio of business days to the total dayHowever, if you travel outside of what is defined as “the North American area,” the rules are a lot stricter. You must have a reasonable basis for being at those conventions,42 which is a much tougher standard than for domestic conventions or seminars or going within the North American area. This North American area comprises the U.S. and its possessions, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, Canada, and Mexico. Puerto Rico is considered a U.S. possession and thus is within the North American areIn addition, the U.S., as a result of treaties, has added the Caribbean Basin countries to this area. These countries are Barbados, Bermuda, Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guyana, Honduras, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, Saint Lucia, and Costa Rica. (There must have been some members of Congress who wanted to visit these countries!) Example: Carol and Nick attend a convention for U.S. makeup artists. If the convention is held in the defined North American area, it would be deductible; however, if held outside this area, it probably would not be deductible. If you are attending a convention or seminar outside of the defined North American area, you must have a strong reason for being there. Thus, for example, if you’re a lawyer who deals in international law, you normally can’t take a seminar or attend a convention in France. If, however, a seminar in France covers some specialized French law topic to which your practice relates and you can’t get this training anywhere within the defined North American area, you could probably deduct the seminar in France. Just to get you used to using the flowchart, we’ll start off with the first question: “Was it a business trip?” If you didn’t have business intent before you left for the trip, you would get no transportation deduction. Let’s use some examples to pull all these rules together and to get you to use the flowchart. Example: Sam takes a 10-day trip to San Diego for a convention. The convention lasts five days, but he also has two travel (business) days. Thus, there are 7 business days out of 10. It was a business trip. We proceed to the box “Trip to business convention or seminar?” The answer would be yes. The next box asks, “Outside of the definedNorth American area?” The answer would be no, since San Diego is within that area. The next box asks, “Were more than 50% of the total days, including travel days, spent on business?” The answer would be yes (7 business days out of 10). Thus, Sam can deduct 100 percent of his transportation. In addition, because he has seven business days, he can deduct seven days of on-the-road expenses. If this trip were outside the area, such as France, he would have to have a good reason to be there for his business. Example: Sam wants to set up a distributor network in Hawaii. He spends three days meeting with people and two travel days out of a 14-day trip. How much of his transportation can he deduct? Let’s examine the flowchart. Was it a business trip? The answer would be yes. The next box asks, “Trip to business convention or seminar?” This would be no, since he’s meeting prospects and not attending a seminar or convention. The next block asks whether the trip “Outside of 50 United States.” Last time I looked, Hawaii was clearly a state; thus, the answer would be no. The next block asks, “Were more than 50% of the days, including travel days, spent on business?” Is 5 out of 14 total days more than 50 percent? The answer would be no: Sam would get no deduction for transportation! He did, however, have five business days and would be able to deduct five days’ worth of on-the-road expenses. Here is a good example of being able to deduct on-theroad expenses but not any transportation costs. He would have to have at least three more business days to deduct the whole transportation, with eight business days out of 14, which is more than half. I hope you finally understand how useful this flowchart is and hope that you can use it. Feel free to play around with it and try various types of trips. Documentation and Audit-Proof Techniques As I mentioned before, there is a great receipt rule: you do not need receipts for any travel expenses under $75 per expensLodging, however, is an exception. If you pay for any lodging, you must get a receipIf you do not keep a good diary or tax organizer, you will need receipts for any travel expenses, even for those under $75. You may not simply make approximations while traveling. Example: Janet stays in the Bates Motel, where the cost was only $22. (Apparently she hasn’t seen the movie Psycho.) She would need a receipt, since the expense is for lodging. Frequently, to save money on the trip, people stay with their friends or relatives. Unless you pay them for lodging, which isn’t a bad idea, you wouldn’t need a receipt, since you get no lodging deduction when you don’t pay anything. You can, however, deduct on-the-road expenses that you incur. In addition, as I suggested, it might be wise to pay your relative a lodging fee. The IRS and Congress have a provision that anyone who receives less than two weeks of rent does not have to report this rent as income,47 but you would still get a deduction for the rent.Example: Sue attends a convention in Phoenix, but stays with her son while she is there. If she pays her son $100 per day for her week’s stay, she can deduct the full $700 and her son does not report this $700 as income. What a great country! The IRS allows self-employed taxpayers to use their per diem rates for meals and incidental expenses without having to keep receiptThis amount varies generally between $30 and $46 per day, depending on locatioThe IRS also has a per diem for lodging, but it can’t be used for self-employed individualAlthough it may seem “nice” of the IRS to not require receipts for your meals and incidental expenses and give you a daily deduction of between $59 and $79, however, it really isn’t recommended to use this method. Frankly, if you hear that something is the IRS method, would you think that it’s good for you? You don’t need receipts anyway, if the expense is under $75 per item! Thus, the IRS is, in effect, giving you “snow in the winter.” The travel expense documentation rules are easily summarized. Either write down the expense properly on the day it happens or lose it. Congress continually reemphasizes that the IRS is not to use or allow approximations of travel expenseIn addition, when you have the right documentation in a daily log, diary, or tax organizer, the IRS spends much less time looking at your records. You are to keep your on-the-road expenses separate from your transportation expenses. As a reminder, on-the-road expenses are deductible for a business day52 and transportation expenses are deductible for a business triIn addition, as explained above, in order to deduct 100 percent of transportation costs, your transportation must meet one of three tests:51/49 test for U.S. trips, conventions, and seminars (more days business than personal)76/24 test for foreign travel (more than 76 percent of your days for business)less than one week test for foreign travel Thus, what type of documentation do you need to audit-proof your travel? To deduct your travel expenses, your records must prove all of the following:54The amount that you spend daily for such things as transportation, meals, and lodgingThe dates of your departure and return home from each trip and the number of days spent on business while away from homeWhere you traveled, described by name of city, town, or similar designationWhy you traveled, including the business reason for your travel or the business benefit derived or expected to be gained (as specific as possible) Although not specifically required by the Internal Revenue Code, it would be important to also document preexisting business intent for the trip. You can solidify this proof with copies of correspondence sent to prospects, e-mails, and documented phone calls. The key is to have business intent by making appointments in advance of the trip. Simply knocking on doors and giving out your card won’t work. Keep a Good Diary/Tracker The Internal Revenue Code and IRS regulations both require that travel expenditures be recorded “at or near the time” that the expenses are incurreIRS agents are trained to require you to have contemporaneous records, since they have a “high degree of credibility” not present with respect to a subsequent statement when you generally lack adequate recalIn short, if you make your appointments in advance, have enough business days to satisfy the transportation tests noted on the flowchart, and keep the right documentation with a tax diary or tax organizer, you will never have to fear an IRS audit on travel and will generate thousands of dollars in deductions that you probably weren’t taking before you read this book. Know what the IRS considers “business travel.” Use strategies to increase your travel deductions and add more fun: – Hire your spouse or significant friend. – Take your business car for family travel. – Track your lodging and meal expenses. – Drive 300 miles a day toward your business destination. – Take courses on U.S. cruise ships. – Make your weekends deductible. – Count travel days as business days. – Combine some fun with a business day without losing any deduction. – Attend a convention or a seminar. – Caretake your rental property. – Visit colleagues and improve your skills and get referrals. – Get educated out of town. – Hunt for a job anywhere in the U.S. – Maximize your deductions for travel in the U.S. and abroad. – Maximize your seminar and convention travel. – Know about documentation and audit-proof techniques. – Keep a good diary. One of the Greatest Single Wealth-Building Secrets The only time that the average child is as good as gold is April 15. —Ivern Boyett There’s nothing wrong with the younger generation that becoming taxpayers won’t cure. Anyone who is married or who is single with children, whether they are adult or small children, or who has friends will benefit. This should cover everyone. Hire Your Spouse in Your Business and Save a Bundle! Whenever you hire a spouse, you have to take out Social Security. Thus the key here is to pay your spouse minimum wage and give as many tax-free fringe benefits as possible. Income shifting: It’s what the wealthy know that you don’t. Who is going to benefit from —Dan Bennett. Know how to hire your spouse.Find out how to deduct all medical expenses and insurance premiums for your family.Learn how to deduct the equivalent of your children’s education and weddings.Know how to audit-proof relatives’ wages against the IRS.Discover the one strategy that could reduce the IRS treasury by over $2 trillion if everyone in the country knew about it.Learn about the Botkin Trust and get a double deduction for all your equipment. (No kidding!)Learn about the number-one financial planning strategy among physicians: the sale-leaseback.Learn how to completely deduct the cost of buildings as well as the underlying lanThus let’s discuss some of the tax-free fringe benefits. The main benefit of hiring your spouse is to enable you to deduct medical expenses that ordinarily would not be deductible unless they exceeded a high threshold amount2 of 7.5 percent of your adjusted gross incom[Adjusted gross income means your salary, pensions, net rents (net of rental deductions), and net income from businesses minus certain deductions, such as moving and pension contributions.] Thus, if your adjusted gross income is $50,000, you can deduct only medical and dental expenses in excess of $3,750. If you’re making $100,000, this figure would be $7,500. All this was a result of various tax reform and “tax simplification” bills. Despite these rules, how would you like to be able to potentially deduct all your medical expenses without any threshold? Sadly, self-employed people normally are not allowed to be covered under this plaHowever, where there’s a will, there’s a lawyer. You can be an exception to the “normal rules” either by hiring your spouse or by forming a regular corporation and creating a self-insured medical plan in addition to your regular medical insurance. It will cover the holes that your policy doesn’t cover, such as deductibles, coinsurance, braces, dental, mileage to and from the doctor, hearing aids, and nontraditional forms of medicine such as chiropractic and acupuncture. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) allows a medical reimbursement plan for even one employeIn addition, the IRS was even more generous when it ruled that you could hire your wife and cover your family and yourself under the self-insured medical reimbursement plaThus, if your only employee is your spouse, you still can qualify for a medical reimbursement plan. You, as a sole proprietor, can pay for medical expenses that the insurance policy doesn’t cover for your employees and their families if they legitimately work in the business. This would be in addition to any medical insurance that you would have and would cover expenses that are not covered by insurancYou even have full control of the design of this plan and can make it as broad or as narrow as you wish. For example, you can cover such expenses as deductibles, coinsurance, braces and dental, mileage to and from the doctor, preexisting conditions, routine physicals, psychiatric treatment, and nontraditional medicine such as acupuncture, chiropractic, etc. that are not covered by insurance. Your company would reimburse you and your family for all these out-of-pocket expenses. The problem is that self employed people are NOT considered employees in order to utilize the medical reimbursement plan. You can get around this problem with hiring your spouse in your business and having him or her elect family coverage. In this way, you are deducting the medical expenses not as employee fringe benefits. Here are the steps required to set up a self-insured medical reimbursement plan:If you’re married and your business is a sole proprietorship or a limited-liability corporation, hire your spouse. If you’re not married, form a regular corporation and have the corporation approve the plan in the board of directors’ minutes.Have the self-insured medical reimbursement plan drafted.If you’ve hired your spouse, make him or her the primary insured on the plan, and elect family coverage, which means that you will be covering yourself and the kids. Either pay the doctor or dentist directly or reimburse the family member for any medical expense incurred. The bottom line is that you get a deduction, and your family gets the money tax-free!Keep the plan in existence for at least three years.The IRS has taken the position that payments made to a self-insured medical plan are subject to reasonable compensation. This means that the total salary and payout under the plan must be reasonable for the hours and work performed. Meet with your accountant to have a yearly per-employee maximum payout from the plan. If you’re the sole stockholder in your corporation, you shouldn’t have any problems getting this plan approved, should you? In addition, this tax strategy can be instituted for a sole proprietorship or a limited-liability corporation. However, if you own more than 2 percent of an S corporation’s stock or are a partnership, you will not be able to benefit greatly from the self-insured medical reimbursement plan. Any reimbursements made to you will be included in your taxable incomThis also applies to partners in a partnershiIn addition, the self-insured medical reimbursement plan is only for expenses incurred after implementation of the plaExample: Ann incurred some medical and dental expenses in 2018. She also has some upcoming medical expenses in 2019. If she were to set up the plan in January 2019, she may benefit from the plan only for expenses incurred after the plan went into effect, which is 2019. S corporations get most of the benefits provided to sole proprietorships. Only owners of more than 2 percent of the S corporation’s stock and partners in a partnership don’t get the benefits of the medical reimbursements. Note: Keep all receipts for medical expenses that will be reimbursed. Sandy’s Tip: You should generally use a good fiduciary to establish and operate a health reimbursement plan. The charges for managing the plan and for providing you the plan are very low, especially considering that the benefits can result in tens of thousands in a year. Discrimination Requirements for a Self-Insured Medical Reimbursement Plan A self-insured medical reimbursement plan has one drawback: It must not discriminate in favor of the owners or highly compensated employees. In addition, you must cover all full-time employees. Thus there are three key questions: What constitutes “discrimination”?Hot Tip How SelfEmployed Taxpayers Can Use the Medical Reimbursement Plan.Who are “highly compensated employees”?Who are “full-time employees”? These are good questions and I am glad that you asked them. The definition of discrimination seems complicated, but it’s really easy to understand it and avoid discrimination. A plan is deemed discriminatory unless13it covers 70 percent or more of all employees, or70 percent or more of all employees are eligible to participate and 80 percent of those eligible actually participate, orthe IRS finds eligibility nondiscriminatory based on the facts and circumstances. Example: David has 10 employees, but only 5 are full-time workers. To avoid discrimination, David must cover at least 7 of his workers or make at least 7 workers eligible. You can worry yourself and your accountant about all these statistics, or you can do what I did with my corporation, which is to cover all full-time employees. This eliminates any problems. Example: Tom hires Carey, who is both his wife and only full-time worker, in his self-employed business. Tom sets up a medical reimbursement plan covering all fulltime employees’ medical expenses that aren’t covered by insurance and elects family coverage. Tom may deduct all medical expenses covered by the plan for Carey and her family, who are Tom and the kids. The next question is, Who is considered “highly compensated”? Congress says that a highly compensated person is one of the five highest-paid stockholders or among the highest-paid 25 percent of all employeeIf there is discrimination, then the highly compensated people are taxed on the amount that is deemed discriminatorAn example will explain this. Example: Alan’s corporation provides a self-employed reimbursement plan for those who aren’t officers. If one of the officers receives $4,000 of the reimbursement, he or she would have to report $3,000 as taxable income, the amount in excess of what would be allowed those who aren’t officers. It truly is amazing that there are people in Congress thinking of this stuff. Why they can’t simply allow all owners to benefit without having to put in this complexity is beyond understanding. Exceptions to the Rules Now that I have informed you of all the discrimination rules, I should point out that the IRS and Congress have noted several groups of people who don’t have to be covered. The following is a list of employees who are exempt:16Employees who are part time. This means employees who normally work less than 25 hours per week. Employees who have not reached age 25. (This exception seems very odd. As you probably know, age discrimination isn’t allowed in this country, yet the IRS and Congress encourage us to hire people under age 25 without giving them this fringe benefit! You might wonder why this discrimination exists. The reason is that we don’t have any tax policy in this country. Our policy is based on the short-term interests of those whom we elect to Congress.) Employees who are seasonal. This is defined as anyone who works for you less than nine months during the year. This exception was put in to encourage hiring college and high school children.Employees covered under a collective-bargaining agreement.Employees with less than three years of service. Thus you can make workers wait three years before they get these benefits—or you can fire them, which is another option (only kidding!).Employees who are nonresident aliens. One further interesting allowable discrimination is for routine physicalYou are allowed routine physicals and diagnostic procedures for officers and highly compensated employees, and you can discriminate on providing this benefit. You just can’t provide this to dependents of officers or employees without providing it to dependents of employees who are not highly compensated. Example: Acme, Inc., provides a self-insured medical reimbursement plan for all its senior officers that provides reimbursement only for routine physicals and diagnostic procedures such as a complete MRI body scan. Even though only highly compensated people are getting this benefit, it would not be taxed to them because of this exception. Hire Your Children and Deduct the Equivalent of Their Education and Weddings If you were to send your kids to college, would the college tuition be deductible? The answer is no! You may get a little tax credit, but that’s it. If you pay for their room and board and provide a car, would that be deductible? The answer would be no. If you were to pay for your daughter’s wedding, would that be deductible? No! But how would you like to be able to deduct the equivalent of all of this? The answer is to hire your children in your business. Wages paid to an assistant are deductible. If your kids use this money to pay for college, room and board, and weddings, aren’t you getting the equivalent of a deduction for all of these? Yes! The tax rules on hiring kids are that wages paid from a parent to a child under the age of 18, if hired in either a self-employed business or a limited-liability company, are exempt from Social Security and unemployment taxeThis exemption does not apply to incorporated businesses, which must take out Social Security andunemployment tax on everyone. You also can hire kids who are 18 or older, but it doesn’t work as well unless you are in a fairly high tax bracket. The reason is that once the kids reach age 18, you must take out Social Security and federal unemployment tax. In 2022, the first $12,950 of earned income (i.e., wages) is tax-free because your children receive a standard deduction of this amount on their own tax retur, 20 Now we’re talking! If you pay your kids more than $12,950, they would pay some income tax, but only at the 10 percent bracket on the first $9,525 earned above this deductioExample: You pay your child $12,950 in wages for the year 2022 in your self-employed business. You deduct the $12,950 in wages on your Schedule C (Schedule E if hired in conjunction with rental property), assuming that the wages were reasonable for the time and services performed. You pay no Social Security or unemployment taxes. Your child reports the $12,950 as income from wages on IRS Form 1040 and then deducts the $12,950 as his or her standard deduction. If you’re in the 35 percent tax bracket, the $12,950 produces a tax refund of $4,200 from federal taxes alone, plus a potential savings of $348 (plus a potential 2.9 percent surcharge) from the Medicare surcharge in addition to any state tax savings. Above the $12,950 in wages, you would save at the 25 percent rate (35 percent minus 10 percent bracket of the child). In addition, your child could put away $5,500 per year of his or her earnings into a Roth IRA that would allow the interest and appreciation to be tax-free to the child if used for college. In effect, by hiring your children, Uncle Sam underwrites the education, weddings, and other uses to which the children put their money. The maximum contribution to a Roth IRA for those under age 50 is 100 percent earned income up to $5,500. A common question I get at seminars is, “At what age can I hire my children?” There is a tax court case that held that you could hire a child who is at least age 7. The IRS, which had fought the case, acquiesced (agreed to follow the case), effectively approving the employment of 7-year-oldThis legitimates hiring children who are at least age 7. The problem is what happens if you want to hire your children who are under age 7. Some tax planners are urging people to put their child’s picture on their business cards and pay a modeling fee, even if the child is under age 7. Will this work? Unfortunately, no one knows for sure. We do know that a child can be hired at age 7. If you hire a child under age 7, you are taking a risk. If you wish to be a trailblazer, maybe we can have a case named after you. Unlike hiring a spouse, who is subject to Social Security, children under age 18 are exempt if hired in a self-employed business. Thus you want to pay them as much as possible. However, there’s one major issue when you hire family members: The wages must be reasonable for the hours and work that they perforIt certainly would be unreasonable to pay a child $40,000 to answer phones occasionally!Although there has been lots of litigation on this issue,24 it really isn’t that hard to do it right. A salary is considered reasonable if an unrelated employer would pay the same employee under the same circumstances and preferably in the same businesWhen setting a salary, be sure to allow for the experience or inexperience and ability of your child. The more experience and ability, the more you can pay per hour. Also consider the nine factors that the IRS uses to examine wages for reasonableness:26Duties performedVolume of workType and amount of responsibilityComplexity of workAmount of time required for workGeneral cost of living in the areaAbility and achievements of the employeeComparison of amount of salary with amount of business incomePay history of the employee In order to make your life easier, what I recommend at my seminars is to find out what you would pay to a comparable agency that does the type of work that you need and then pay your child less per hour than that agency. Thus, if you want your 12-year-old son to do some filing and bookkeeping, call a temporary agency such as Kelly Services or Manpower and find out what they charge per hour. If the charge is $15 per hour, you would pay your child $12, and this should be deemed reasonable. If you want to have your 24-year-old daughter mow the lawns on your rental properties, you would call a landscape service and get a quote. You also would need to document what hourly rate you were quoted. It would be ideal to get this documentation in writing in the form of a written quotation from the organization. Documentation Strategies Necessary When Hiring Any Relative Be honest! If you were an IRS auditor, would you believe that your child or spouse was a bona fide employee? You would only if you saw adequate proof. In most cases, it’s absolutely essential that your relatives fill out time sheets or a tax diary at the end of each week. To get your deductions for wages, you must be able to prove what work actually was performeEach day that the relative works, the time sheet or diary should show:The date workedA description of the tasks performedThe hours worked At the end of each day or week, you should approve the time sheet or diary for payment. Payment to either your spouse or your children always should be made by check. Even if your child is too young to have a checking account, you should pay by check. In this circumstance, establish a custodial checking account at your local bank. This would require your signature for the child to withdraw any money! The check completes the audit trail by establishing two things: that you paid the relative and that the relative actually received the payment. The time sheet establishes the validity and reasonableness of the payment. Together you will be audit-proof from the IRS. In addition, have your attorney draft up an employment contract noting the pay rate, duties, benefits, etc. The pay should be based on the hours workeFinally, you want to file the appropriate IRS forms required for hiring any employee. The first step in hiring—relatives or others—is to obtain a taxpayer ID number from the IRS and from your state. Next, you want to complete the necessary payroll paperwork. There’s paperwork even on your child under age 18, who, as an employee of his or her parents, is exempt from Social Security and unemployment taxeHowever, even if no taxes are due, you must complete the following federal paperwork:IRS Form W-4. This simple form must be completed by your employee and stored in your fileIRS Form W-2. If you pay your spouse or child $600 or more, you must give your employee a copy of IRS Form W-2 and file it along with IRS Form W-3 with both the IRS and the Social Security Administration. Dependent child’s business services and wage sheet. IRS Form 941. Use this form to report on a quarterly basis withheld income taxes and to make a deposiIRS Form 940. Although you are not liable for unemployment taxes on wages paid to your child if he or she is a dependent and under age 21, you must file IRS Form 940 anyway at the end of the year. If your child is your only employee, you simply enter your child’s wages as “exempt” from unemployment tax and return the form to the IRThe bottom line is this: Stop paying allowances, tuition costs, and wedding costs. Instead, hire your children in your business, and pay them a reasonable wage. Let them use the money for their tuition, room and board, and weddings. Miscellaneous Income-Shifting Strategies Gift and Shift-the-Tax Technique Here’s one strategy that you will really like. In fact, the good news is that if everyone in the U.S. understood this strategy, we could legally reduce all taxes paid into the IRS by over $2 trillion! The bad news is that the IRS has nothing to worry about because over 99.9 percent of taxpayers in this country have never heard about it. However, it clearly is one of the most powerful techniques available. With this strategy, you gift property rather than cash to a person in a lower tax bracket. The test on who would qualify for this is simple. Take a mirror, and put it in your freezer overnight. The following day, take the mirror out of the freezer and place it under the nose of anyone with whom you wish to use this technique. If the mirror fogs, the person passes the test. You can use this strategy with virtually anyone—your kids, grandchildren, nephews, nieces, parents, or even significant friends who are not related to you. You simply give away the property to these relatives who are in a lower tax bracket than you, and then they sell the property one day later and pay the tax at their brackeThis must be done without a prearranged resalThus you must do this before any contract for the sale of the property occurs. The result is that both you (the donor) and the person to whom you give the property (the donee) have more cash to spend because the IRS took less tax from the person in the lower tax bracket. Think about how this works. Here is a great example from someone I met on an airplane. He was a successful lawyer, and he also was successful in the stock market. He had three kids, and he was paying $20,000 a year for each of his kids to go to college. A smart person was doing a dumb thing. He ought to have been giving each of his kids stock. They then could sell their stock and be taxed on the gain at their brackets and pay their own tuition. Now this lawyer was easily in the 50 percent tax bracket (counting federal taxes, state taxes, and Medicare taxes), and his kids were in the 10 to 15 percent tax bracket. He could have cut his taxes by 70 percent (35 percent savingsdivided by 50 percent)! This can be done with anything—stocks, bonds, valuable collectibles, or real estate. As you can see, the savings from this one strategy alone can be massive. Interestingly, there are no income-tax consequences to making a gift (although there are gift-tax consequences that we will discuss shortly). This means that any recipient doesn’t pay income taxes on the gift (and you get no deduction for it).37 The donee takes the same basis and holding period that you had, increased by any gift tax paiI should note that this discussion applies to gifts and not if you inherit property as a result of death. With inheritances, you get a fair-market-value basis as of the date of death, and the holding period begins on the date of deatExample: Jackie receives some stock from her parents as a gift. The parents bought the stock two years ago for $20 per share, and it’s worth $50 when they give it to her. (I wish this happened to me!) Jackie would get a $20 basis, the same basis as her parents had, and the same two-year holding period. (In contrast, if Jackie inherited the stock and it was worth $50 at the time of her parents’ death, her basis would be $50, the fair market value.) I have assumed that the basis of the gift is less than the fair market value. If, however, the fair market value is less than the basis paid, the recipient won’t be able to get a loss when he or she sells the property. The basis is always either the basis when the property was purchased or the fair market value as of the date of the gift, whichever is lower! Thus no loss would be allowed if you sell the property shortly thereafter. Congress wants part of our profits but as little as possible of our losses. This is illustrative of the “Golden Rule”: He who has the gold makes the rules. The key is to never use this technique with property that would produce a loss. Use only with appreciated property. As mentioned earlier, there are gift-tax consequences in making a gift. If you’re single, you can give away up to $16,000 in 2022 per person per year gift-tax-freIf you’re married, you can give double this, which is $32,000 in 2022 per person per year, free of gift tax, by consenting to treat one-half the gift as made by each spousThis may not seem fair, but there are two people involved instead of just one. In addition, you get a lifetime exemption from gift taxes of $12.06 million per person in 2022. A couple would thus get double this amount, which is $24.12 million without an estate or gift tax. Thus, you can give away a lot of gifts without paying any tax. An example will illustrate how financially rewarding this strategy can be. Example: Melissa owns some real estate that is worth $200,000 and has appreciated $90,000 since she purchased it. If she sells the real estate, she will pay at least $21,510 in capital gains tax plus any state income tax. This also doesn’t take into account any depreciation that she took, which would be taxed as ordinary income. If she transfers this property to her three children, who, in turn, sell the property shortly thereafter, Melissa would owe no gift tax owing to the annual exclusions and lifetime exclusion. The children each would pay tax on one-third of the gain, $3,409 each at their bracket. Thus Melissa would have saved 50 percent of the tax, or $11,283! This savings alone could almost pay for the tuition for one child at a state school. Beware of the Kiddie Tax Congress was aware of how powerful this gift-tax technique—and the following gift-leaseback technique—could be, even though it is not used by most Americans. Congress tried to kill off or at least limit its benefits with what is now known as the “kiddie tax,” which sadly applies to a lot more people than just kids. The Kiddie tax applies to unearned income for children under age 19 and college students under age 24. Unearned income is income from sources other than wages, salaries, or earnings from self-employment. Unearned income is usually interest and dividends and capital gains. The way the Kiddie tax works is that the first $1,150 of a child’s unearned income qualifies for the standard deduction, the next $1,150 is taxed at the child’s income tax rate, and unearned income above $2,300 is taxed at the parent’s marginal income tax rate. With respect to earned income, the rules are the same as before, which means that the Kiddie tax doesn’t apply to earned income. Also, the Kiddie tax doesn’t apply to other relatives such as your mom or uncle or aunt. Using prepaid tuition plans and section 529 plans to save for your kids’ college tuition is now even more important than putting money in their names. All interest and gains in these plans are tax-free to the extent the funds are used for college tuition. Double-Deduct All Your Equipment Plus Protect It from Judgments! How would you like to double-deduct all the equipment that you use in any business or real estate venture and make your assets lawyer-proof from judgments? Sounds too good to be true, doesn’t it? Well, you can, and it isn’t that hard to accomplish. This is far and away one of the top financial planning strategies in the country, especially for physicians. You start by giving away property that you are using in business, preferably after it has been depreciated, either to your relatives or to an irrevocable trust set up for your relatives. You then would lease it back from them in trust and pay monthly lease payments. You’ve already depreciated the equipment, and now you’re deducting the monthly lease payments, which, in effect, gives you a double deduction for the equipment. Moreover, if you’re sued thereafter, you have no business assets in your name and thus have liability-proofed your assets. This strategy is known as the gift-leaseback technique. The gift-leaseback technique involves several steps:Give away property that you own. To put the gift-leaseback strategy to work, you first must own the asset. You as an individual would give away the asset to your children or to any other person who passes the “mirror test” described earlieIf you have a corporation, however, your corporation may not make such gifts. Give away property that you’ve depreciated. Fully depreciated property produces the maximum deductions for the gift-leaseback strategy. By using fully depreciated assets in a gift-leaseback, you actually create new deductions. Fully depreciated property produces no depreciation deductions. However, the gift-leaseback technique creates a rent deduction from the fully depreciated equipment. Example: You own and use in your business a Cadillac. The car is fully depreciated. It has a retail value of $10,000, as published by the National Automobile Dealers Association in its Official Used Car Guide, which is available on the Internet (www .nadaguides.com). According to the IRS Annual Lease Value Table, the annual rent on the Cadillac is $3,100 for the next four yearThus you set up an irrevocable trust for your 14-year-old daughter, give the Cadillac to the trust, and then lease it back. The result is that you get a yearly tax deduction for the $3,100 of rent that you pay to the trust, which will own the propertAssuming that you’re in the 45 percent federal and state tax bracket, your taxes are reduced by $1,395. Your daughter receives $3,100 from the trust and pays a tax of roughly $235. The family unit—you and your daughter or son—receive a net benefit of $1,160 from a car that otherwise would have produced no tax benefit. Remember, however: Do not give away property that would produce a deductible loss if you sold it.Give the property to an irrevocable trust rather than directly to your son or daughter, and use an independent trustee. Although you may be able to give the property directly to your son or daughter if they are not minors, some cases, and especially if you live in the fifth circuit (Louisiana, Texas, and Mississippi), require you to use a trust and have an independent trusteIn addition, if your kids or grandkids get sued, the creditors can’t touch the property held in trust if the trust document is drafted correctly. Finally, if your children are minors, they can’t own a car or real estate directly; thus a trust becomes mandatory. In short, regardless of where you live, I would advise setting up a trust for this technique. It will greatly protect you in a wide variety of ways.Pay a reasonable rent. All cases in the area require a reasonable rental for the property used. With cars, you can use IRS Publication 15-B, Annual Lease Value Table. Just plug in your vehicle’s fair market value, and the publication will tell you how much a reasonable rental would be. If you want to leaseequipment other than vehicles, you have several ways of tracking down what a reasonable lease payment would be. One method would be to get a quotation from an equipment leasing company for similar equipment. The IRS also has taken in its litigation the position that you can charge 40 percent of the fair market value of the property as of the beginning of a three-year lease. Example: Mary has a top-of-the-line computer. If the computer is worth $2,000 today, she could lease it back from her son’s or daughter’s trust for 40 percent of its value, or $800 per year, for the next three years. Go to your local newspaper and clip out an ad that looks similar to your equipment. This would establish a fair market value. (By the way, you can’t be the one who places the ad in the newspaper!)Document your nontax business reason. Another requirement of some courts is to have a nontax reason for the gift-leaseback or sale-leaseback (which will be discussed below).50 With what property can you use this technique? It will work for any tangible property, such as computers, printers, desks, file cabinets, chairs, cars, copiers, and shredders. (In Washington, DC, we have a lot of shredders.) Moreover, you can do this with anyone who passes the mirror test. Thus anyone is eligible. Get a letter from your lawyer outlining a nontax reason for the gift-leaseback. (See my discussion of the sale-leaseback below.) Deduct 100 Percent of Your Real Estate—Even the Land One interesting twist with this technique is with real estate. Buildings are depreciable, but land is not. You thus have to make some allocation of the purchase price for any rental property between land and buildings. If you don’t, the IRS will make the allocation for you, which you will not like. How would you like to make your rental properties 100 percent deductible—even the portion allocated to the land? You can by using this technique. When you purchase a property, you would divide the title between the land and the building. The building would be in your name, but the land would be in the name of a trust for your children. You would then lease back the property from the trust. The result is that you can depreciate the building and can get a deduction for the land in the form of ground rent. Thus you are now effectively able to deduct 100 percent of your purchase price. Isn’t this a great strategy? Even if you already own some rental property, you can accomplish this. Just have your lawyer transfer the title to the underlying land to a trust set up for your children or relatives. (Get an appraisal on the land.) You then would pay ground rent to the trust.Sale-Leaseback Technique A final way to shift income is with the sale-leaseback technique. This technique has been around for many years. It puts the friend or relative in the leasing business but allows you to select the asset. It has the same requirements and steps necessary for the gift-leaseback, but this is a sale and not a gift. You would use this technique when you want to cash out or you want to help your children or grandchildren with some great risk-free estate planning. A great example of how this works follows. Example: Sam lives in his home, which is completely paid off. He gets few tax benefits from the home because there’s no interest and no depreciation since it is his home. Although Sam paid $130,000 for his house 20 years ago, it’s worth $380,000 based on an appraisal. Sam now sells the home to his three children for the full fair market value but gives them great terms: $3,000 down, and he finances the rest of the purchase price with an installment note for the remaining $377,000 at 7 percent interest. Subsequent to the sale, Sam’s children rent the house back to Sam at fair market rent. The results are startling:Sam has no capital gain because his total gain is under $250,000. There is a relatively even cash flow because the mortgage payment is just a little more than the rent payment.Sam’s children now can depreciate the home because it is rental property.Sam’s children can deduct any repair costs because it is rental property.If the house appreciates before Sam dies, all appreciation is out of Sam’s estate because his kids own the house.Finally, the children can visit Sam and the property once a year and deduct their trip as a caretaking expense. This is one technique for which you will need a good lawyer because it must be done correctlThe lease should be relatively short term and not exceed the seller’s life expectancy. The rent and sale price should be at fair market value; there can be no “deal” given. An independent appraisal for both the sale price and the rent should be obtained. All payments should be made to the appropriate parties. No forgiveness of any payment should occur, especially in the first two years. In addition, the mortgage payments should not exactly equal the rent. Make one of the payments more than the otheFinally, as with the gift-leaseback, you will need a legitimate nontax reason for this transactioGet a letter from a lawyer stating that this transaction is recommended:To protect from creditors such as nursing homesTo avoid any ethical conflictsTo provide professional management of the propertyTo avoid probate fees and to save on estate taxes. Hire your spouse and save a bundle deducting medical expenses.Hire your son or daughter and deduct the equivalent of their education and weddings.Have the right documentation when hiring any relative.Use the gift-push and shift-tax technique. It could save you an enormous amount of taxes.Beware of the kiddie tax.Use the gift-leaseback technique to double-deduct all your equipment.Use the sale-leaseback technique to give benefits to your children, cash out, and get some great risk-free estate planning.Use the sale-leaseback technique to deduct land. How to Turn Your Car into a Tax-Deductible Goldmine This is the season of the year when we discover that we owe most of our success to Uncle Sam. —Wall Street Journal (referring to the period from January to April) Iam often asked at my seminars, “What is the number one business expense that gets audited by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)?” Most people think that it is entertainment or home office. The answer is your vehicle expense. The reason is that a car is a big-ticket item and is the most used and abused. Increase your automotive deductions significantly but also to lock them in with proper documentation tactics. Business Use If you drive only one car for business, what’s the maximum business-use percentage that you can achieve? 100 percent. If you drive two. Find out why using two or more cars in business will maximize your deductions.Learn why the IRS method of deducting car expenses is generally a bad deal (with one exception).Learn when buying or leasing a car is better.Know which vehicles can give as much as eight times the normal automobile deduction.Learn about some frequently overlooked automotive deductions.Learn when it is better to either sell a car or to trade one in.Understand why donating a business car is a tax disaster and should almost never occur.Know how to maximize your business mileage and some little-known rules that even most accountants don’t knocars for business, could you drive one car 100 percent for business and another car 100 percent for business? Yes!1 Your business use is based on business miles driven. You calculate your business use by dividing business miles by the total miles driven during the yeaYou do this for each car driven for businesExample: Jeremy drives his car 20,000 total miles during the year. If he puts on 15,000 miles for business, he may deduct three-fourths of any automobile-related expenses or three-fourths of his total mileage at the IRS standard mileage rate. Use Multiple Cars for Business and Increase Your Spendable Cash The two-car strategy puts extra money in your pocket only when you’re converting an otherwise personal asset to business use. In other words, if you have two cars in your family, make them both deductible. But don’t buy a second car simply to implement this strategy. In addition, some cases have required you to have some business purpose for using more than one car. This is very easy to establish, however. Can you use one car for rainy days and one for sunny days? Can you use one car for “high sale” prospects and one to look a bit “poorer”? There are lots of reasons for using different cars. I have a friend who is a successful life insurance salesman. He uses his Mercedes when he meets with multimillionaire estate-planning prospects and his older Lexus for nursing home–care insurance sales. You will notice that by using two cars and switching off between them, you are able to get an extra $6,168 in new deductions each year. Moreover, I based my analysis on cars that cost $28,000. More expensive cars will generate more tax savings. There’s one disadvantage to using the two-car strategy, however: you must keep track of your business mileage during the year on a daily basis. Simplified record keeping using a statistical approach, which will be discussed later, won’t worNow that you realize that you should use your second car in business, too, the next question becomes, “What basis do I use for depreciation?” Although tax law mandates that you depreciate your car’s basis, which is usually your purchase price,6 there’s a slightly different rule if you used the car for personal use first. When you convert your car to business, your basis for depreciation becomes the lower of the cost or the market value of the car on the date it is first used in business (which is usually the lower basis).7 We accountants call this the lower of cost or market-value rule. Although many people do not know this rule, it’s applicable to all sorts of property. Thus, if you convert your home to a rental property, the same rule applies. As used here, cost is what you paid for the car plus any capital improvements, such as amounts spent to rebuild an enginMarket value is the fair market value of the vehicle on the day that you convert it to business usGenerally, you can determine market value using the Blue Book, The National Automobile Dealer’s Association Official Used Car Guide, which lists two values for used cars: retail and wholesale. You want the higher number, which is the retail value. In addition, there are many Web sites that list this information, such as my site, www.taxreductioninstitute.com. Example: Assume that you purchased your personal car several years ago for $20,000 and today that car has a retail value of $10,000. (You should be that lucky!) Your basis for purposes of computing depreciation is $5,000, which is the lower of cost or market value. Deduct the Larger of the Actual Expense or the Optional IRS Standard Rate Unlike corporations, individuals such as employees and the self-employed have a choice of methods to write off their vehicle expenses. You can use either the IRS optional standard mileage rates or the actual expenses. The actual method allows you to deduct all car expenses based on your business use. This means that you can deduct part of your gas, wash, wax, depreciation, insurance, repairs, tolls, interest, taxes, and other costs related to your car. As an alternative, you could use the IRS standard mileage rates in lieu of all this. Even if you’re using the IRS method, however, you can deduct the business use’s share of interest, taxes, and tolls. Many people miss this one deduction. Interest and taxes are deductible to the extent a car is used for business. Sadly, many people, including some accountants, don’t know this. They’ve thus taken out home-equity loans in order to deduct the interest on their car payments, which they didn’t need to do, and taken a risk if they didn’t pay off the loans. Many people are still making this bad mistake owing to a lack of knowledge. In 2022, the IRS gives you 58.5 cents per mile from January 1 to June 30 and 62.5 cents per business mile from July 1 to December 31. You also get 14 cents per mile for charitable use throughout the year, and 18 cents per mile for medical. Medical expenses and moving expenses incurred by active-duty members of the military is increased to 22 cents per milMoving expenses are no longer deductible except in the case of a member of the Armed Forces of the on active duty who moves pursuant to a military order and incident to a permanent change of statioExample: In prior years, you deducted 52,000 miles using the optional IRS standard mileage rate. This year you drove 20,000 miles for business. You may deduct $11,700 (20,000 × 0.585). Interestingly, the IRS method allows the same 58.5/62.5 cents per mile regardless of the cost of the car, regardless of its prior mileage and condition, and regardless of age. Thus the older and more “doglike” the car, the better the method becomes. Consequently, the IRS method is best for cars that cost less than $20,000 and for which you accrue at least 15,000 miles per year. I called a firm that specializes in car costs and helps to develop the numbers for the IRAccording to one of the company specialists, the IRS method assumes that you purchase one of the cheapest cars made in the United States (normally a Ford Mustang), which costs about $30,000. It assumes that you have no options on the car. It assumes that you drive 10,000 miles per year for three years. Thus, if you have a vehicle that meets these criteria, you may be better off with the IRS method; otherwise, using actual expenses (gas, oil, depreciation, repairs, insurance, etc.) would be the better deal. This is particularly true for vehicles placed in service in 2018 or thereafter because of the substantial increases in depreciation on business vehicles. The IRS method doesn’t reflect these new, improved changes.There are some limitations to the IRS method that you should know about. First, as noted earlier, it can only be used by employees, people who are self-employed, and limitedliability corporations, not corporationSecond, it can’t be used in a fleet operation, such as using two cars at once. You can switch cars and you can use the cars in different businesses simultaneously, but you just can’t use the cars simultaneously in the same businesYou also can’t use the IRS method if you took any accelerated depreciation on the car. Now that you’ve probably used the wrong method, can you switch? The IRS allows you to switch to the method of actual expenses anytime, with no hassle and no audiHowever, going from actual expenses to the IRS method is much tougher. If you used the slower straight-line method of depreciation and not the faster accelerated method of depreciation, you can switch to the IRS methoIn addition, if you sell your car and get another car in business, you can start using any method. You might be wondering why the IRS allows you to switch easily from the IRS method to actual expenses but makes it more difficult to go from actual expenses to the IRS method. I don’t have the slightest idea why this occurs. This is just one of the quirky rules in tax law. Depreciating an Automobile My goal here is not to make you an accountant; thus I am not going to delve into the intricacies of depreciation. However, there are some tax-planning tips and traps that you should know about. Depreciation is nothing more than a cost-allocation method; therefore, pick the method that gives you the biggest deductions each year. There are two basic depreciation methods for business vehicles: straight line, the slower method that allows you to deduct in equal amounts, and accelerated, which allows for faster deductions up front. Prior to the implementation of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA), which applies to cars placed in service in 2018 and thereafter, Congress had severe limits on yearly depreciation. They did this in order to stop taxpayers from being able to write off luxury cars. The new law allows for much higher yearly limits in years 2 and thereafter. In fact, for most years, the yearly limits have tripled. To give you a great example of how much the impact the changes in the TCJA had on depreciation, let’s assume that you purchased a new BMW for $50,000 and use it 100 percent for business. I know that a 100 percent usage is unrealistic but it makes the math simplier. Under the old rules (prior to 2018), it would take you roughly 18 years to full depreciate the car. As a result of the TCJA, if you place the same BMW in service in 2018 or thereafter, you could write it off in 5.3 years! As you can see, the changes are significant. I can just see advertisements say, “buy a BMW, Mercedes or Cadillac and eliminate your taxes.” You will also eliminate your cash, but I can see these ads coming. In addition, tax law requires you generally to treat your car as having been purchased during the middle of the year of purchasThus, if you buy your car in January, for depreciation purposes, you’re deemed to buy the car on July 1. The same would be true if you purchased the car in September. This is important: Because it’s considered to be purchased on July 1, you don’t get a whole year’s depreciation in the first year. Thus you would think that you should buy your business vehicle in December, get a half-year depreciation, and probably get a better deal from the dealer too. However, there’s a congressional “gotcha.” (Someone actually thought of this.) If you buy over 40 percent of all depreciable equipment for the year during the last three months of the year, then you must treat the purchase as if you made it in the middle of the last quarter of the year, or on November 15. The effect of this is to cut back on your first year’s depreciation. This is a great example of needless complexity in our tax laws. The result of this needless complexity is a deferral of your depreciation until a later year. The bottom line is that you should buy most of your vehicles before October 1, unless you can elect to expense the vehicle, which will be discussed below. You’re subject to yearly depreciation limits—and you don’t even get these if you use your car less than 100 percent for business. An example will illustrate this. Example: You purchase a $40,000 car and use it 75 percent for business. The personal use reduces your deductions. The depreciation options that you would have are as follows: $6,000 under MACRS ($40,000 × 20 percent × 75 percent business use).$7,500 under the luxury limits ($10,000 × 75 percent business use). The maximum depreciation you can claim is $6,000, which is the lower of the MACRS limit or the luxury limit. Buy “Heavy Metal” Vehicles and Trucks and Get Fast Write-Offs You should note that all the luxury limits apply only to passenger automobiles. If you can come outside the definition of passenger automobile, you have no luxury limits and can write off the entire business use of the car over five years or even less with the expense election. So what is a passenger automobile? Congress defines a passenger automobile as a four-wheeled vehicle that is manufactured primarily for use on public streets and highways and has an unloaded gross vehicle weight of 6,000 pounds or lesHowever, if a vehicle is a truck or a van or has a truck base, as most sports utility vehicles do, then the test changes to having a loaded gross vehicle weight based on manufacturer’s suggested carrying weight. I should note that certain commercial vehicles, such as ambulances, hearses, taxicabs, and limousines, are not deemed passenger cars if they’re used for commercial purposes. Example: Sam drives a sports utility vehicle that has a manufacturer’s suggested carrying weight of 7,500 pounds. This is not deemed to be a passenger vehicle, so the yearly luxury limits on depreciation do not apply. You might be wondering how you can tell what the manufacturer’s suggested carrying weight of a vehicle is. You can either call your dealer or look on the door jam of the driver’s side. There is a metal plate that notes your manufacturer’s suggested carrying weight. As a result of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, since 2018 businesses can elect to write off up to $1,000,000 worth of equipment as long as total expenditures are less than $2,500,000. This election applies to trucks and vans if the van can carry nine or more passengers. In addition, both types of vehicles must have a gross vehicle weight over 6,000 pounds and have a truck chassis. Thus, you can write-off 100 percent of the business use of the truck or qualifying van, and this even applies to both new and used trucks. Used trucks, however, must have at least a six-foot or bigger cargo bed. All sports utility vehicles don’t come under this rule because they have a separate rule that applies to them. Since 2018, new and used trucks can both be written off in the year of purchase based on your business use. This applies to both new and used qualifying trucks as long as they are new to you. Sports Utility Vehicles: If you buy a new or used SUV that has a gross vehicle weight over 6,000 pounds and carries passengers and has a truck chassis, you can effectively also write off 100 percent of the business use based on an increase on bonus depreciation to 100 percent. Example: Scott buys a Cadillac Escalade for $80,000 and uses it 90 percent for business. Thus, his depreciable business use becomes $72,000 (90 percent of $80,000). The way the bonus depreciation works is as follows:You would first take the business use of the vehicle,which is based on the business miles divided by the total mileage for the year. Thus, if the Cadillac is driven 9,000 business miles and 10,000 total miles, the vehicles is deemed to be used 90 percent for businessSecondly, you would multiply the business use by the cost, which is 90 percent of $80,000, which results in a $72,000 deduction. This is what you would deduct in the year that of purchase. I should note that if your business use drops below the business-use percentage during any of the succeeding five years, you will have to recapture or pay back some of the depreciation that you claimed. Thus try to keep the vehicle in your business for at least five years for the same business use. Also, one extra perk that I bet you didn’t know: The IRS allows you to deduct the business use of any chauffeur cosThus, if you pay a chauffeur $40,000 to drive you everywhere and use the vehicle 80 percent for business, 80 percent of this cost would be deductible. Also, this applies to any qualified SUV or van that is new to you. It can be a used vehicle as long as it is new to you. It’s Usually Better to Buy than Lease a Vehicle Since Congress put some limits on depreciation, you would think that leasing would be the better deal; however, Congress thought of this too. Congress made the IRS come up with killer tables that approximate the benefits of what you would have gotten had you purchased the vehicle. You actually would add back some income on your tax return, which is the same as eliminating some lease deductions. However, there are a few other times when leasing is better than buying. Leasing generally becomes better if:You can’t get good financing to buy a car because of bad credit.You put on less then 15,000 miles per year.You keep your vehicles for three years or less. This book assumes that you or your spouse have a small business or consulting practice or are considering going into business. If you’re solely an employee, the rules are different and, as mentioned, more restrictive. Employees cannot deduct interest and taxes on cars, but they can deduct the business-use portion of their lease payment. Thus, if you are an employee, either pay all cash for the car or lease the car. Considering that a lease payment includes the interest that someone is paying, I find it strange that employees can’t deduct interest but can deduct the entire amount of the lease payment based on the business use of the vehicle. This is another example of incongruous tax treatment between employees and small business owners. Deduct Supplies and Equipment Used to Maintain Your Business Car If you use the actual method of deducting your car expenses (gas, repairs, depreciation, etc.), you may be missing a bunch of automotive deductions. Go through your garage and basement or wherever you store tools and cleaning supplies. Make a list of the items that you use on your car. You’ll probably find a battery charger, battery cables and tester, shammies, wax and wash cans, a pump, a vise, a tire inflator (that plugs into a lighter), sander, small tools, and a car repair manual. (My wife, Lori, fixes my car.) You should have found a number of items that you’d overlooked. Generally, you can deduct the cost of nonequipment items (e.g., shammies, wax cans, and water cans) if they’re expected to last less than a yeaMost equipment, such as compressors, tools, and tire inflators, must be capitalized and depreciated unless they’re considered to be of de minimis value. From my experience with IRS audits, generally an item that is worth under $500 per item without invoices and $2,500 per item supported by invoices, or $5,000 per item supported by invoices if your company is subject to and has an audited financial statement, might be allowed as an expense rather than being capitalized and depreciated over timSince you’ll be backtracking through past acquisitions, it’s likely you won’t have receipts. Take photographs that can represent reasonable substitute evidence and conservatively estimate the value of the items if sold today. This will be less than cost, but it will be better than no deduction.When to Sell and When to Trade: That Is the Question There are two ways in which you can dispose of your vehicle: Sell it or trade it. Some people think that donating a business car to a charity after completely writing it off is a good deal. Sadly, this is a tax disaster. Most people know only half the charitable deduction rules; that is, if you donate a car to a qualified charity, you can deduct the amount received by the charity for the sale of the car. Thus, if your car is sold by the charity for $6,000, you would get a $6,000 deduction. Now for the rest of the story. 32 You must deduct from this amount any gain that would not be a long-term gain. What this means is that you must subtract any depreciation taken on your vehicle. Thus, if your vehicle was sold for $6,000 and the depreciation taken was $6,000 or more, you would get zero deduction—nothing, nada, zip. This is why, from a tax standpoint, you should rarely donate a car or other depreciated property to a charity. I heard in my seminars about two other methods for disposing of a vehicle. One was to park your vehicle in certain shopping malls near Los Angeles where there’s a high probability of car theft. The other method was from a New York student who suggested abandoning the vehicle on the highway. Needless to say, these methods aren’t legitimate. Example: In 2018 you drove your car 20,000 miles for business. You would reduce your basis by 25 cents per business mile, or $5,000 (20,000 business miles × $0.25 for 2018). Once you know your basis, you need to know what your car will sell for. You can go to my Web site at www.taxreductioninstitute.com, which has an appraisal button, or you can go to your classified ads or check out other Web sites.If a loss would result, which is normally the case, you should sell your car and take a deductible loss. Thus, if you used your car 80 percent for business over the last three years and the estimate is that you will have a loss, you can deduct 80 percent of that loss in the year you sell the vehicle! Priot to the passage of the TCJA, if you traded a car, you would have no gain or loss on the trade-in. Thus, if you had a gain, you would avoid the gain on the trade-in. However, if you had a loss and you traded in the car, you would not have been able to deduct the loss. This was a real trap for the unwary. Under the TCJA, however, you recognize both gain and loss on trade-ins. Thus, any trade-in is treated as a sale even though you didn’t get any cash. Example: You have a car that cost you $24,000, and you’ve taken $8,000 of depreciation. Thus your adjusted basis is $16,000 ($24,000 cost minus $8,000 depreciation). If this vehicle is worth only $10,000 when you sell it, your loss would be $4,800 ($6,000 total loss × 80 percent business usage). If you have a loss, the flowchart recommends that either selling the car outright or trading it to a dealer will still result in the loss. However, if you were to have a gain, then the flowchart recommends that you sell the vehicle outright since you will want the cash to pay the tax on the gaiThus, if you have a gain, you want to get enough cash to pay the tax. Trade-ins won’t provide you with any cash. Unfortunately, an estimated 80 percent of all people who use their car in business don’t know this information, so they’ve made tremendous mistakes. If you trade in the car, which happens many times, you won’t get any cash to pay the tax that results from the TCJA. I had a physician in my audience who bought a new Cadillac every three years and then traded it in under the old tax law. He did this for all of his 20-plus years of practice. When I ran the numbers, I figured out that he had lost about $16,000 of loss deductions every three years for the full 20 years of practice. That’s about $96,000 of lost deductions! How’s that for an expensive mistake that an inexpensive book like this could have eliminated? However, under the TCJA, this wouldn’t have been a problem since loss is recognized on trade-ins. When I told the physician that all he had to do was sell his current car to deduct the $96,000 of deferred losses, he ran out of the room as if he was running for the goal line. I never saw anyone move so quickly! I guarantee that he got rid of his current car even if he had to blow it up. What Counts as “Miles Driven for Business”? After speaking to over 200,000 people over the last 17 years, it still amazes me how little most people know about what trips constitute business mileage and about the documentation needed for the IRS. In fact, I would estimate that well over 95 percent of my students aren’t aware of this information. Obviously, both the IRS and accountants aren’t doing a good job in disseminating this crucial information, as you’ll soon see. So what are the rules for business mileage? The IRS requires you to separate business use from personal usYour business-use percentage determines your business automobile deductions. Example: You drive your car 30,000 miles per year, but only 20,000 of these miles are for business. Thus two-thirds of your car expenses—such as depreciation, wash, wax,interest, repairs, and insurance—would be deductible. 39 If your corporation provides a car to you or your employees or if you’re selfemployed and you provide a car to your employees, the personal-use percentage determines additional employee compensation. The compensation to your employees can be based on one of three methods:The annual lease table rule, for which you would use the IRS Annual Valuation Table. Essentially, you would determine the fair market value of the vehicle on the date of first use and find that number on the IRS Annual Valuation Table found in IRS Publication 15-B(2022), “Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.” The correct lease amount will be noted. You then would multiply this amount by the personal use. Example: Your corporation buys a car for $20,000 and provides the car for your use. If you use it 50 percent for business, 50 percent of the lease valuation amount would be taxable to you ($5,600 × 50 percent = $2,800). This is an easy method but very expensive. Although there are other, cheaper methods, they have limited availability, as you’ll see.The cents-per-mile rule, in which you would be taxed a flat 57.5 cents per mile on your personal mileage in 2015. A good tax diary would be essential for you to distinguish between personal and business mileage. As I’ve said before, the golden rule—“He who has the gold makes the rules”—applies here. The cents-per-mile method works only with a vehicle whose fair market value is under $16,000 and if employees drive it at least 10,000 miles per year.The commuting valuation rule,41 which is (as you would guess) for commuting use only. The good news is that this is a great method that probably provides the lowest cost to the employee or to you if you’re incorporated. However, it’s also the most limited. There are three conditions. First, you would need a written policy requiring the employee to commute to work. Second, you would need a written policy noting that the car cannot be used for personal purposes other than for commuting. Third, you can’t use this for a “control employee.” This is the IRS “gotcha.” A control employee is any board member or officer who makes at least $120,000 in 2022. It also applies to any other employee who earns at least $245,000. As you can see, the commuting valuation method won’t work for you as the owner of your corporation. Also, as a reminder, all these methods apply only if you provide a vehicle to your employees or if your corporation provides you a company-owned vehicle. If you’re self-employed or a limited-liability corporation (which is treated like being self-employed anyway), you don’t need to worry about this. When Is the Mileage Business and When Is It Personal? Before I discuss what constitutes business versus personal mileage, you need to know the difference between a temporary business trip and a regular business stop or trip. A temporary business stop is one where you’re expected to be for less than a yeaA regular business stop is one where you’re expected to be for more than a year or where your stay will be indeterminate. Thus, if you’re going to the bank from your home or to the post office, this would be a regular business stop because you will be going to the bank on a regular basis and not less than a year; on the other hand, if you visit a client or attend a seminar, that would be a temporary business stop. Most people know that when they go to a business stop from their office, the mileage is business. Thus, going to a client, the bank, or the printer from your office is all business mileage. The real question and confusion arises when you go to a business stop from your home. The IRS says that there are three types of situations that will determine whether your mileage from your home is business or personal.Situation one: Your home is your principal place of business. If your home is your principal place of business all business stops from your home are deemed to be business mileage, with the exception of a direct commute from your home to your main office where you might have a joThus home-based business owners and consultants who make their home their principal office come out ahead here. Example: Tom is a consultant who works primarily out of his home. He goes to the bank from his home to make deposits on Monday and visits clients Tuesday through Friday. All mileage would be deemed business mileage because his home is his principal place of business. Situation two: Your home is not your principal place of business, but your business trip takes you outside your “normal geographic area of work.” If you’re traveling outside the geographic area where you normally conduct business, then all round-trip mileage to these business stops constitutes business mileage, as long as you will not be there more than one yeaExample: You live in Detroit but attend a one-day seminar in Grand Rapids. All round-trip business mileage would be deductible. If, however, you were stationed in Grand Rapids for a project that’s expected to last more than a year, this mileage would not be deductible because it wouldn’t be a temporary business stop. Situation three: You travel within your normal geographic area. If your home is not your principal place of business, your business mileage to your office and/or back home would be deductible if you went to a temporary business stop on the way to the office or on the way homAll business stops after the temporary business stop also would be deemed business mileage. Example: You go from your home, which is not your principal office, to meet a prospect for business. You then go to stops A, B, and C and then to your office. All stops would be deemed business mileagExample: Instead of the preceding stops, you first go to the post office and then to business stops A, B, and C and then to the office. Your trip to the post office would not be deductible because it’s a regular business stop and not a temporary business stop. However, all mileage thereafter would be deductible. When you file your tax return, you or your corporation will have to answer specific questions regarding business vehicles and about having appropriate documentation in writing. The questions are part of your tax return, and you must answer all questions under penalties of perjury. Flowchart for determining business mileage (home business owners should be able to deduct all trips from home to any business stop). One question you will have to answer is, “Do you have evidence to support business use?”49 Another question is, “Is the evidence written?”50 To sustain your business deductions and not be hit with severe penalties, you must be in a position to answer “Yes” to both questions. It is IRS policy to allow electronic documentatioUsing a good electronic tracker on your smart phone will thus become both critical and much easier to use than trying to do it manually. Be alert to fact that not all trackers are compliant.There are four other dreaded questions that also must be answered regarding the miles driven during the year. In your tax return, you must report miles driven during the year broken down in the following four categories:52Total milesTotal business milesTotal commuting milesOther personal miles (noncommuting) Many people are surprised that the IRS asks for “other personal miles” and are curious what this entails. Other personal miles, other than commuting, are trips to a doctor, a place of worship, charitable functions, and driving children to various activities, such as karate, music or dance lessons. Your records also must be adequate to support business use. An adequate record is one made at or near the time of business usOther sufficient evidence is acceptable only if you have direct corroborative evidence (such as statements from witnesses) or other documentary evidencI should note that you don’t need to keep your records daily or contemporaneously with each trip, but the log should be completed near or at the time of each evenA weekly log of what you did during the week would be acceptable. What this all means to you is that the IRS clearly states that the log need not be daily. A log of your weekly activities made at the end of the week would suffice. However, I have found (and other accountants concur) that if you don’t have something “triggering” you to record your mileage, expenses, tips, and other items daily, you’ll probably forget about these expenses and thus lose the deduction. It’s crucial to have a good tax organizer or diary. One of the best , easiest to use, and most compliant trackers is Taxbot. You can find out more by going to Taxbot.com or downloading it from the iphone app store or the Google Playstore for droids. One other point is that although the IRS allows for other evidence such as statements by witnesses, I wouldn’t depend on this if I were you. People forget quickly, and having to call in witnesses is a pain. Just keep a good tax diary or organizer and you will simplify your life. If you use the IRS method, you still need adequate records of your business mileage; you just don’t need to keep receiptThe IRS standard mileage method eliminates the need to keep gas and oil receipts but, most important, does not eliminate the need for mileage records to be broken down into business, personal, and commuting categories. A careful reading of the IRS regulations seems to indicate that you do not need to keep receipts for automobile expenses such as gas, oil, or tolls that are under $75 per expensIf you fail to keep the required records, such as a tax diary or organizer, this will expose you to huge penalties. Moreover, Congress wants the IRS to start implementing fraud penalties when taxpayers don’t have good records of automobile business usTypes of Mileage Logs That the IRS Will Accept The good news is that you have your choice of several types of methods that are acceptable to the IRS. The bad news is that I’ll bet that you haven’t been doing it right all these years. The first choice, which is the IRS’s favorite method, is the “perfect one-day car log.” You would list all your appointments, both business and personal, in a tax diary or tax organizer. When you use the car to get to an appointment, you would list the mileage next to the appointment. At the end of the day, you would record your final odometer reading. Finally, you would tally your business, personal, and commuting miles and reconcile those numbers with your beginning and ending odometer readings. The important point is that you would record your business and personal mileage daily for each stop and for each trip. This is clearly the most complicated of all the allowable methods. The second option is the 90-day log. IRS regulations allow a mileage record for a representative portion of the year to substantiate business use for the entire year. In the first example used by the IRS, it’s noted that you can keep detailed daily records of your business and personal mileage, somewhat akin to the “perfect-use one-day log method,” for the first three months of the year, to substantiate the entire year, if your business use of the vehicle follows the same pattern for the remaining nine months of the yeaCaution: Despite allowing this statistical (90-day) approach in IRS regulations, some examiners have disallowed it under the theory that people won’t go to court to fight it. Hot tip: A new application/service is available for most smartphones that will allow you to track your business mileage for each stop at the press of a button. Check out www.taxbot.com for more information. Example: You would keep track of your business and personal mileage for three consecutive months. If your business mileage for the three sample months is 6,000 miles and your personal mileage is 2,000 miles, you may deduct three-fourths of your car expenses for the year, or you may take three-fourths of your total year’s mileage and use the IRS standard mileage rate on this amount. Although the IRS regulations use the first three months of the year as an example, you probably can use any normal three consecutive months. They can be January through March, March through May, or (if you’ve nothing for the year yet) October through December. This method is available only if you use your car on a relatively even basis from month to month. The IRS will want to see that you’re not picking your busiest three months. They would check your tax diary or appointment book to see if you had relatively the same number of appointments during the other nine months. This method assumes that you drive the same car in business during the year. If you switch off cars in the same business, you may not be able to use any statistical approach and may be limited to the “perfect one-day log.” The third approach, which is also a sampling type of approach, is called the firstweek rule. Here, the IRS assumes that you keep an automobile log for the first week of each month and then can prove by adequate records that your business use for the remainder of each month was consistent with that of the first weeThe key to all the sample approaches listed here is to enter all appointments in your appointment book, tax organizer, or diary—this proves consistent business use. As you can see, these methods are fine but a bit complicated. How would you like a much easier method? I call the fourth approach the no-hassle approach. This method was started by Mr. FrankeHe was told by his accountant to keep track of his automobile using the perfect one-day car log. He did this for one month and wrote down over 600 appointments. He realized that he probably was losing money on all the time spent on documentation. He thus came out with a brilliant approach. He decided to keep track of only his personal and commuting mileage, which was a lot less involved. This method is somewhat similar to the 90-day log. If you list your daily appointments in your diary or tax organizer, here’s how you can make your 90-day test:Document your beginning and ending 90-day odometer readings and the odometer readings on January 1 and December 31.Record personal miles each day during the 90-day test.Record your commuting mileage during the 90-day test.Apply the percentages to the test to determine the actual mileage. Example: For 90 days you would keep track of your personal mileage only and your beginning and ending odometer readings for the test period. Thus you might say, “To office, three miles and to home, three miles,” and record all your business appointments without noting the business mileage. If your total mileage for the three-month test is 8,000 miles, of which 2,000 were personal miles, then 6,000 miles were for business. Thus, in this example, you could deduct three-fourths of your car expenses for the year. As a reminder, this method works only if appointments are recorded and they substantiate the business mileage. In addition, you must keep track of your appointments to show that the time period chosen truly represents the business activities for the entire yeaAlso, as noted earlier, you can’t use any sampling method if you use a second car during the yeaGet a good mileage tracker A good tracker will automatically keep track of your business vs personal mileage and keep track of expenses too. If Your Records Were Lost or Destroyed, Use the Reconstruction Approach What do you do if you have no records for the prior year? I have a method for you. It’s called the desperation or reconstruction approach. Here you would backdate a tax diary based on your appointment book and, in effect, create the records. The IRS allows you to reconstruct your records if they were lost owing to circumstances beyond your controExamples of circumstances beyond your control would be flood, fire, earthquake, theft, or other casualtYou theoretically cannot reconstruct records if they were lost through your own carelessness or negligencPractically speaking, most IRS agents on audits will let you reconstruct your records if you use a reasonable basis for the reconstruction. You just can’t pull the numbers out of thin air. For example, if you keep a diary of your appointment, you probably could write down the estimated mileage next to the appointments. However, don’t use what IRS agents call the finger in the wind approach. This is where you estimate your business mileage without a log or some backup support. You’ll be hit with substantial penalties for trying to pull the wool over IRS eyes. At many seminars I get asked about what is a reasonable percentage for business mileage for various professions. I thus did some research and, based on actual cases, and found the following information on various professions and the amount of business mileage allowed for that profession by the court.Certainly, with the right documentation, you may be able to claim much more than was given. You can’t, however, use these statistics in lieu of documentation. I offer them here to give you a feel for what was allowed by the courts. Improved Tax Credit for Electric Vehicles (EV) If you buy an electric vehicle (EV) with a 2022 or early 2023 model year in the current tax period, you can get up to a $7,500 tax credit on new vehicles, which has a cap of 200,000 manufactured models. Thus, you need to move quickly. Please note that the models must be assembled in North America to qualify. If you buy an EV in 2023, there are some changes. First the 200,000 model cap is removed. Secondly, at least 50% of the battery components must be assembled here to get half the credit and 40% of components must be extracted or produced here. This credit is not available for expensive cars (over $55,000) or trucks/SUVs over $80,000. Moreover, you need to earn under a certain income. Note: in 2023 and thereafter, you can get up to a $4000 credit for used EVs too! Use two or more cars in business and generate a lot more in deductions. Deduct the larger of the actual method for your car expenses or the IRS standard rates. Generally, the actual method produces more deductions. Buy heavy cars (weighing over 6,000 pounds) and get a fast write-off: 1. With trucks that have a gross vehicle weight (GWV) over 6000 pounds and new and used trucks with the same GWV and that have cargo areas of 6 feet or more you get to deduct up to $500,000 of the business use by making an election to do so on your tax return. 2. With both new and used SUVs with GVW over 6,000 pounds and that have truck chassis, you can elect to write-off $25,000 of the business use.Buy your car, rather than lease it, and hold onto it for at least four years.Identify and deduct supplies and equipment used to maintain your car.Sell cars that produce a deductible loss, but trade cars that produce a taxable profit.Generally sell cars if you’ve used the IRS method of deducting vehicle expenses.Rarely donate a car that has been depreciated. You probably won’t get any deduction. Make your car into a tax-deductible goldmine either by making your home the principal office for your business or by having a temporary business stop on the way to the office and/or on the way home.Keep a 90-day daily log of car use, preferably using the no-hassle approach.Use a good mileage and expense tax tracker. Home Office: The Misunderstood Key to Saving $15,000 Every Five Years Tax reform is taking the taxes off things that have been taxed in the past and putting taxes on things that haven’t been taxed before. a home office deduction isn’t worth the risk or hassle? I’ll bet your answer to this question is yes! Without question, the home office area has more myths than any other topic. People have told me that they’d heard that they can’t claim a home office because their home is not zoned commercially. The truth is that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) couldn’t care less about your local zoning. I also have heard with more frequency than I would have believed that “you can’t claim a home office deduction unless you have a back entrance.” I’m not sure what business these people are in! Is a home office really worth it? Be honest. Do you believe or have you heard from your accountant that taking —Art Buchwald. I’ll be covering the following:Learn why it’s worth taking a home office deduction. Learn how to qualify for a home office deduction using your home as a principal residence.Learn how to qualify for the home office deduction by using the “meet and greet” test. Learn how to qualify for the home office deduction by having a separate structure apart from the home as an office. Learn how to qualify for the home office deduction by storing inventory and product samples.Learn how to qualify for the home office deduction by having a day-care business in the homA home office deduction is like having a bunch of pregnant dollar bills—they give birth to many more dollars. If you look at the example for the individual named Snyder, you will see that, based on a $200,000 home, a home office can generate over $15,000 in cash every five years. This is based on the fact that you get some new deductions. You can deduct some of your property taxes and mortgage interest as a business expense. You also can increase your business mileage because travel from a qualified home office to a business stop is all business. Finally, you get additional deductions that you aren’t normally eligible to get, 2 such as depreciation, some repairs on the home, utilities, and some house cleaning. I also have factored in something that most people never think of: interest. I assumed that you could earn a conservative long-term interest rate of 6 percent on your tax savings. My question now is simple: “Assuming that you would qualify for the home office deduction, would an extra $15,000 or more every five years be worth the slight increase in documentation?” The 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act made the home office deduction even better since the home office deduction provides a partial way of getting around some of the limitations that the TCJA implemented, such as the limitation on $10,000 in state and local income /property taxes and the interest limitation on up to $750,000 in mortgage debt. This is just another reason why many people should have either a side business or become an independent contractor. Home Office Rules The general rule is that you can’t deduct your home or dwelling unit insofar as it is used as a residencHowever, if you meet the home office rules, you can deduct some expenses related to your residence. The law states that a home office deduction is available only to the extent that a portion of the dwelling unit (your home) is used exclusively on a regular basis as one of the following:4Your principal place of businessA place of business that you use to meet and deal with patients, clients, or customers in the normal course of your trade or businessA separate structure that is not attached to the dwelling unit (residence)Part of a day-care business .(Cont.)Learn about the little-known IRS strategies needed to audit-proof a home office deduction.Learn how to avoid most taxes on the sale of a home where the home office deduction was claimed.Take the one deduction that normally gets missed—even if you never claim a home office.Understand the rules for the wonderful expensing of assets that could increase your depreciation deductions by over $20,000 per year.Facts: Snyder files a joint tax return with his wife. The Snyders earn $198,000 in taxable income. This puts them in the 33 percent federal and 8 percent state income tax brackets. Mrs. Snyder earns $98,000 from her job as an employee in town. Mr. Snyder works out of his home and earns net taxable income of $100,000, which is reported on Schedule C of Form 1040. How Snyder benefits from the home office deduction. In addition, in the case of an employee, the home office deduction is allowed only if the exclusive use is for the convenience of the employeAlthough this is a factual issue, if you are an employee, the courts generally feel that this test is met if “you are required by the employer to have a home office or to work out of your home.” Let’s examine these tests.Qualify by Making Your Home Your Principal Place of Business What constitutes a principal place of business has been the subject of a great deal of litigation and controversy. The good news is that this issue went all the way up to the Supreme Court to decidThe bad news is that the Supreme Court should never take a tax case because the justices rarely understand what they’re doing in this area. The court provided two tests for determining whether your home is a principal office. The first and most important test is, “Where are the most important functions conducted for your business?” For most businesses, it’s where you would see customers or patients or where you render your services. Example: Doctor Soliman was an anesthesiologist. He rendered his services in the hospital but billed his patients and kept his books from home. The hospital is where he performs his important services. The second test is a time test. If you work over 50 percent of your total working hours out of your home, then your home will qualify as a principal place of business. This is important to you because the IRS requires all businesses first to examine where they do their most important functions for their business. If there’s a clear answer, this is the test that is used, and you never resort to the time tesSome examples of major factors that the IRS uses would be where you meet your customers, where you render your services, and where contracts are signed. Some examples will illustrate the application of the Soliman decision very clearly. Example: A sales representative spends 30 hours per week taking orders from clients in various stores and spends 12 hours per week working at home on administration for his business. Visiting with clients and taking orders will be deemed the most important functions for his business, and he would not be eligible for the home office deduction under Soliman. Yuck! Example: Same facts as above, but the orders are placed over the phone, and the sales representative spends 30 hours a week working from his home and 12 hours seeing customers. He would be allowed a home office deduction because the most important business functions occurred at home (selling products and taking orders), and if there was any confusion, he met the 50 percent time tesThose adversely affected by Soliman will be people who really perform most administrative duties out of their home and/or put in over 50 percent of their working hours outside the home. Realtors, insurance professionals, financial planners, and many consultants probably will have their home office deductions disallowed because of where they see clients and where they usually perform most of their working activities. The same would be true for most plumbers, carpenters, and electricians. Thus who can take a home office deduction under the Soliman case? Anyone who truly works out of his or her home and performs his or her most important functions at home. This would include network marketers, freelance writers, musicians whodo most of their practicing out of their homes, and consultants who do most of their important work out of their homes. Because the Soliman case eliminated the deduction for many people, Congress passed a great exception to the Soliman case. If you meet this exception, you don’t need to worry about the Soliman requirements. If you don’t meet this exception, you’re back to trying to fit within the Soliman factors. Exception to Soliman In 1999, Congress passed a new exception to Soliman helps many small-business and home-based business owners. Per the exception, your home office qualifies as a principal place of business if 9The office is used to conduct administrative or management activities of your trade or business, andThere is no other office where you conduct substantial administrative activities. Thus, if you do your logs, contact patients or customers, listen to educational tapes, read business materials, and prepare bills for customers, you’re rendering administrative activities. Example: John, a self-employed plumber, spends most of his time in homes repairing and installing plumbing. He has an office at home that he uses exclusively and regularly for his administrative and management activities, such as billing customers, making appointments, and ordering supplies. His home qualifies as a principal office for the home office deductioExample: Eddie, an independent contractor of clothing, meets with clothing store owners in their stores. He shows his new lines and takes the initial orders, which he completes in his home. His home is where he conducts his administrative activities for billing customers, keeping his books and records, ordering supplies, and forwarding orders and reports to his company. Assuming that Eddie uses a room exclusively and regularly for his business, his home office is deemed to be his principal place of business for the home office deduction. The real congressional “gotcha” is found in the second part of the exception. You can’t have another office where you render any significant administrative or management activities. This means that you can have another office, but you just can’t do any substantial administrative services therIn fact, even if an office is provided you, you still may claim a home office deduction if you opt to work out of your home and perform all your administrative and management activities out of your home. Thus, if you do some minimal paperwork elsewhere, this won’t disqualify you from the home office deductioThis is especially true if you render some administrative or management services at a location that isn’t a fixed office or fixed place, such as a hotel while traveling or a caExample: Edith is a traveling saleswoman. She occasionally writes up orders and sets appointments from the hotel room during business travel. She has no fixed location for performing her administrative or management activities other than in a set spot in her home. She does all her other administrative activities in her home, including finishing the sales paperwork, preparing reports to her company, keeping her books and records, and billing customers whenever credit was declined or a check bounced. Her home qualifies as the principal office for purposes of the home office deduction. This is a very different result from that of the Soliman case, where both Edith and Eddie would have been deemed to perform their most important functions away from the home. Thus this exception has saved their deduction, as it will save the home office deduction for many small-business owners. I also should note here that the key is that your administrative and management activities must occur out of your home. Other activities can occur from other locations. Thus, if you meet with clients or customers or you render services such as medical, legal, and plumbing away from the home, these services will not disqualify you from the home office exceptioThe key to the Soliman exception is that your administrative or management activities must occur out of a set spot in your home. One final point that should be noted is that you can have other companies do some administration for you, and this won’t disqualify you from the exceptioThus, if you have a billing company bill your customers, this won’t disallow the deduction. Qualify by Meeting and Greeting Clients or Customers in Your Home If you do not use your home office as your principal place of business, another way to qualify for the deduction is to use the home office as a place to meet or deal with clients, patients, and prospects in the normal course of your businesHowever, this exception applies only if the use of the home office by your clientele is substantial and integral to conducting your businesOccasional meetings are insufficient to make this exception applicablExample: A lawyer meets with clients in her office three days a week and in her home two days a week. She qualifies for the exception. This “meet and greet” test requires a physical presence in your home. You can’t just make phone calls, no matter how extensive or frequent the conversationIf you want to use the “meet and greet” exception, I recommend at my seminars that you have your clients, customers, or prospects sign a guest log whenever they come to your home. This log should show who the guest was, the date that he or she visited you, and the reason for the visit. More on this will be discussed below in the section on audit-proofing your home office.Qualify by Using a Separate Structure You may qualify for a home office deduction if, in connection with your trade or business, you use a separate structure not attached to your dwelling unit. The separate structure must be used exclusively and on a regular basis for your busines(These requirements will be discussed further below.) It need not, however, be your principal place of business or a place where you meet customers or prospectExamples of structures that meet the “separate structure” requirement would be an artist’s studio, a florist’s greenhouse, and a carpenter’s workshoQualify by Storing Inventory or Product Samples A deduction is allowed when you use your home on a regular basis to store either inventory or product samples if you are in the business of selling products at retail or wholesale and if your residence is your fixed location for that businesThis exception is available to you even if you sell your products at no fixed locations, such as craft shows, flea markets, or a customer’s business premises. On reading this, you might be tempted to place all your product samples along your hallways and in your bathrooms in order to inflate the deduction (as some tax books and even some companies have recommended). However, the IRS has thought of this trick. The storage of your inventory or product samples must be in a separately identifiable area suitable for storagMoreover, only this separately identifiable storage area would qualify for the deduction. Example: Jane runs her network marketing business out of her home, where she sells vitamin supplements. She stores her inventory and product samples in a set part of her basement. She may claim a deduction for the space used to store product samples and inventory. The space used doesn’t have to be used exclusively for storing inventory. It just has to be in a set, identifiable area. Thus, even though Jane uses her basement for occasional personal use, her deduction wouldn’t be denieFinally, this exception applies only to inventory or product samples and not to other business assets. Thus it doesn’t apply to old records,28 law or business books, or client or business fileQualify by Running a Day-Care Center in Your Home Without question, day care is in big demand and is very encouraged by companies and the government as well. In fact, in terms of deducting home office expenses, day-care business gets slightly better treatment than other small businesses. The general rule is that a day-care business can deduct a portion of a home that is used regularly in the trade or business of day care for children and adults who are age 65 or older or who are mentally or physically incapable of caring for themselves. The key is that the day care must have applied for or have been granted a state license or be exempt from having a licensIf you want to claim a home office deduction for a day-care facility, you must comply with state law requirements. The nice fact about day-care facilities is that you don’t need to use a room or part of a room exclusively for the businesIn fact, you can use a room for day care during the day and use it for your family or for personal reasons at night and still get a home office deduction. However, the IRS has developed a formula for prorating your business use among the available hourThe formula uses two fractions. The first fraction is the square footage used by the day-care facility out of the home’s total square footage. The second fraction would be the total hours in the year that the day care uses the home divided by the total hours in the year, which is 8,760 for a normal year and 8,784 for a leap year. Hours used to prepare for the day care or to clean up after the care is over also get treated as day-care hourThus it would appear as follows: Square feet used by day care × total hours in the year for day care Total square feet of the home hours in a year (8,760) This fraction is the portion of home expenses such as interest, taxes, utilities, repairs, and depreciation that can be deducted on the tax return for the day-care business. Example: Mary runs a day care out of her home for 12 hours a day, 5 days a week, 50 weeks a year. (Thus she runs the day care for 3,000 hours a year.) She uses 1,200 square feet of the home’s 1,600 square feet for the day carAssuming that her total housing expenses for taxes, interest, depreciation, utilities, garbage, etc. totaled $10,000, the following would be her home office deduction: 1,200 sq ft × 3,000 hours × $10,000 expenses = $2,569 1,600 sq ft 8,760 total hours You Must Use Your Home Office for Business Regularly In addition to one of the business uses that I noted earlier, you must use your home regularly for business. Interestingly, the Internal Revenue Code does not define regular use. However, some courts indicate that regular use means using your home three to four days a week for 10 to 12 hours a weeThus, if you use your home for business less than this, such as four hours per week, your use may not be deemed regular, so your deduction may be disallowed. You Must Use Your Home Office for Business Exclusively With the exception of storing inventory or product samples or running a day-care facility in your home, you can qualify for the home office deduction only for the parts of your home used exclusively for business. This is a difficult requirement for many people. The term exclusive use means just thaNo personal or other nonqualifying work may occurin the home office areA portion of a room can qualify as a home office, but all business items must be located in the same contiguous area, and there should be some physical separation of the business area from the personal areYou must get all personal items out of the home office area other than purely de minimis items such as a radio for music while you’re working, etc. I constantly get asked whether the IRS actually will come over to your home and check out whether you’re using a portion of the home exclusively for business. The answer is yes, an agent may pay a visit. Get any personal items out of the home office area. Get all nonbusiness books out of the bookshelf in the home office, and don’t play games on the computer. An IRS agent that I know was involved in an audit where the taxpayer kept a convertible couch in his home office. When questioned, the taxpayer admitted that his parents sometimes slept there on occasional visits. His entire home office deduction was disallowed. What Deductions Are Available with a Home Office? In claiming deductions for a home office, you need to break them into three categories: 1. Expenses that are directly related to the home office portion. Examples of these types of deductions are painting of the home office or repairing a water leak in the home office. These would be deductible in full. 2. Expenses that don’t benefit the home office either directly or indirectly. These expenses are not deductible because they are clearly not related to the home office in any way. Some examples of these expenses are repairs or painting in another room, plumbing repairs in an unrelated bathroom, and according to the IRS, lawn care if you don’t meet and greet people in your home. These expenses are not deductible at all. Many people believe that in order to take the deduction, you must own your home. This is incorrect. You can deduct the portion of the rent that’s attributable to your home office square feet. 3. Indirect expenses related to the home in general. These include depreciation, costs for a home security system and for monitoring, utilities, and repairs and painting to the outside of the house. These expenses get allocated using one of three methods noted below. Methods for Allocating Indirect Expenses There are three methods that you can use to calculate the amount of indirect expenses that you can deduct. Method one is based on the amount of home office square feet out of the total usable square footage of the house. Interestingly, only the usable square feet count, not the total square footagYou also can ignore square feet outside the house, such as a deck. Maximizing home office square footage.Example: You have 1,675 square feet in your home, and your home office is 221 square feet. The allocation of your indirect expenses would be 221/1,675 = 13.19 percent.The second method is known as the number-of-rooms method. You would take the room used for the home office and divide by the number of rooms in the housThus, if you have eight rooms, and you use one room as an office, you may deduct –1 , 8 12.50 percent, of the indirect costs. There’s a catch with this method, however. The IRS allows this method only if your rooms are approximately equal in size and you don’t use a room that’s much smaller than the other roomThe final method, which may be the best method of all, is called the net-squarefootage methoThis is similar to the square footage method, but you subtract from your total square feet of common areas, such as hallways, entranceways, landings, and stairways. In the preceding example, you would have 221 square feet in your home office divided by your net square feet, which would be 1,395. This would result in a deduction of 15.84 percent of your indirect expenses. I’ve discussed these methods in order to alert you and your accountant to take the approach that results in the biggest deduction. As you can see, in our example, the amount of the deduction will vary from 12.50 percent using the number-of-rooms method to 15.84 percent using the net-square-footage method. This could result in thousands of dollars of extra deductions over your duration of use of a home office. Starting in 2013,47 the IRS has allowed use of a “simplified method” for keeping track of your home office deductions. If you use this method, you would compute the amount of square feet used in a qualifying home office and multiply this figure by $5. This is your total deduction. Thus, if you use a room that has 250 square feet for business, you would get a deduction of $1,250 (250 feet × $5/sq foot). The problem with this method is that it gives the worst results for taxpayers for several reasons. First, the simplified method is in lieu of any other home deductions including depreciation. You don’t get depreciation. Secondly, the home office rules only allow a home office deduction up to the net income from the business. Any excess can be carried forward to future income. With the simplified method, there is no carryover. Third, you cannot deduct any other home office expenses such as the business use of your interest and taxes in computing your net income from your business. These expenses, however, can still be taken as an itemized deduction. Finally, you must meet all of the home office requirements such as being the principal place of business and use a portion of the home regularly and exclusively. In short, I don’t recommend the simplified IRS method. Audit-Proofing Your Home Office Take a Picture Take a yearly, dated picture of your home office to establish that it was used exclusively for business. It’s easy to say that you qualified for the home office deduction. However, if you get audited for it, you’ll need some planning to prove that you were eligible in the past. Thus one important bit of documentation that you should have is a yearly photograph of your office to prove that it actually existed and that there were no personal items in the office that would disqualify the deduction. It’s best to use a digital camera because the date of the photo usually is recorded on the picture. Do not send the photo to the IRS with your tax return. One person did this—and in the photo made some “undesirable” hand and arm gestures! Personally, I thought that it was quite amusing, but the IRS higher management didn’t, and the person got audited. Keep Records of the Square Footage Keep blueprints or other documentation showing the square footage of your home office and the square footage of your home. If blueprints aren’t available, make a drawing of your home office showing the relationship of the home office’s square footage to the total square footage of the home. Display Your Address and Phone Number Use your home office phone number and address on business cards, stationery, and advertising as proof that you actually operated a business from your home. If economically feasible, install a separate business phone in your home. The business phone should be listed in the business’s name in both the White and the Yellow Pages. You should have business stationery with your home address on iIf you have two business addresses, they should have equal prominence on the stationarYou also should use your home address on your business cardIf two addresses appear, they should have equal prominencIf you have two phone numbers, they should have equal prominence toYou would be wise to put in a second business line anyway because tax law allows no deduction for the first telephone line into your personal residence regardless of usLocal charges are deductible only if you install a second phone line in your home. Welcome to tax simplification! I should note that long-distance charges made for business reasons are deductible and should be documented on your bill. Have Your Business Visitors Sign a Logbook If you claim a home office deduction because you use the office in the normal course of business to meet and deal with clients, patients, or prospects, have your business visitors sign a guest book each time they come to your office. The guest book need not be formal, just a record of business contacts who meet with you in your home office. It should contain the name of the guest, the date of the visit, and the purpose. Remember: The burden of proof is on you. If you claim use of your home office to see clients and customers, you must be able to prove that clients, patients, prospects, or colleagues were physically present in your home office.Keep a Work-Activity Log for Time Spent in Your Office Showing how much time you spent working in the home office is important because it establishes that you put in your substantial administrative time and worked in the office regularly (at least 10 hours per week). Thus a work-activity log, which could be a meticulously annotated daily diary or tax organizer, constitutes an excellent supporting document to establish where you spent your work time. This does not need to be elaborate. You already have a daily diary. Simply use it as an activity log. If you are working in your home office, you simply could write “home office” (or some abbreviation) and note the time spent there. I’ve also found that some details that indicate the specific type of work you are doing at home help immensely. Problems with Claiming a Home Office, a home office deduction can be worth thousands to you every year. There are three drawbacks to claiming this deduction. However, most of the drawbacks can be eliminated with some planning or knowledge. Remember my favorite saying: “Where there’s a will, there’s a lawyer.” 1. The Home Office Deduction Has a Gross Income Limitation Your home office deduction is the only business deduction that is limited to the net income from the business that is attributable to your home officExample: Alan conducts a home-based business for which he claims a home office deduction. He grosses $6,000 from his business and has $5,000 of business expenses other than for his home office. His home office expenses for his share of the taxes, utilities, interest, depreciation, security monitoring, and garbage collection costs amount to $2,500. He may deduct only $1,000 of these costs because his net income from the homebased business is $1,000 ($6,000 less $5,000 of business expenses). This is the bad news. The good news is that you don’t lose the excess deductions from the home office because you get to carry them over foreveWhat this means is that you can use the excess deduction against future income from your home business. Example: In the preceding example, if Alan makes a net profit of $4,000 next year, he may use the unused $1,500 deduction to offset this $4,000 net profit and thus pay tax on only $2,500 in the next year. 2. You Will Have to Pay Tax on Any Depreciation at the 25 Percent Rate If you claim a home office deduction, you will be depreciating a portion of your home. This means that you take the home office portion of your residence and deduct the cost over 39 years. Guest book and work-activity log for a typical morning.Example: You paid $200,000 for your home. If you use 10 percent for your home office, then you deduct $20,000 over 39 years at the rate of approximately $513 per year. Thus, if you were in the 35 percent federal tax bracket over all the 39 years, this would save you $7,000. If you sell your home, you cannot exclude the entire amount of gain on the sale. As a result of the tax simplification law, Congress makes you pick up this depreciation taken after May 6, 1977, as income and taxes you on it at your normal tax rate, but up to a maximum 25 percent ratExample: Karen claims a home office in 1922 and thereafter. If she claims $4,000 in depreciation as a result of the home office, she’ll have to report the first $4,000 of gain on the sale of her home at the 25 percent rate of tax, which means that she would pay back $1,000 on the depreciation takeThis may sound bad to you, but it isn’t. If you are in the 32, 35, or 37 percent bracket when you take the depreciation but have to pay it back at only the maximum rate of 25 percent, you’re certainly coming out ahead! An Employee Can Claim a Home Office Deduction Only if the Office Is for the Convenience of the Employer As I mentioned earlier, employees don’t get the same benefits from the tax law that self-employed people get. If you’re an employee, your home office not only must meet all the rules noted earlier but also must be used for the convenience of the employeThus the home has to be more than just helpful and appropriate for you. This means that at least one of the following conditions are met:Your company must require you to maintain your home office as a condition of your employment.The home office is necessary for the functioning of your employer’s business.The home office is necessary for you to perform your duties. What all this means is that if your employer provides you with a perfectly good office, you probably can’t claim a home office deduction as an employee. If, however, the office is inadequate for you to perform your functions (if there’s too much noise, if there’s not enough privacy for sensitive work, or if you’re a musician and practice is mandatory), then you can claim a home office. Frankly, it’s much better for an employee to have a side business and work this business out of the home. However, if you choose not to have a business, at least get a letter from your boss mandating that you work at home and giving the reasons for this directive. Remember: If the IRS feels that the office is for your convenience and not that of the firm, you won’t get the deduction.Depreciate Furniture and Equipment That You Use for Business A major misunderstanding is that the home office deduction applies to all business equipment, too. This is not true. The deduction applies only to the real estate and related deductions, such as interest, taxes, depreciation, utilities, rent, and maintenancFurniture and equipment are depreciable to the extent you use these items for business. You do not need to claim a home office deduction in order to deduct your furniturExample: You work in an office in your home but do not qualify for the home office deduction because the office is not used exclusively for business. Your work adds up to 80 percent of the use. The result is that you may depreciate the furniture and equipment such as the desk, the chair, the computer, the carpeting under the desk, and the lamp lighting up the desk. This applies even if you’re an employee taking work home. If you use a desk 80 percent for business, you may depreciate that desNow that you are aware that you can depreciate furniture such as desks, chairs, file cabinets, and computers, the question becomes, “What do you depreciate?” The answer is that if you purchased the desk, the chair, the file cabinet, and the computer several years ago, you may start to depreciate those items under what is known as the lower of cost or fair market value rule. Example: You have an antique desk that you purchased three years ago. It cost you $500 but has a current fair market value of $600. (Antiques tend to appreciate.) If you use the desk 80 percent for business, you may depreciate 80 percent of the original cost of $500, which is the lower of the cost or fair market value. Required Record Keeping You’ll need to have some reasonable method for determining your business use. With bookcases and file cabinets, it’s easy to determine business use. If you have three file drawers, of which you use two strictly for business files and one for personal files, then you can depreciate two-thirds of the file cabinet. Similarly, if you have a bookcase with four shelves, of which three are for business books and one for fiction, then you can depreciate three-fourths of the bookcase. With desks, chairs, and computers, it becomes tougher. You want to keep records of use for three consecutive months, as you would do with your automobile, by documenting what you or your family members do when using the furniturThe following is an illustration of what I would do for some sample days out of the three months. On Monday, no one uses the room, so you write down nothing. On Tuesday, you made client calls from 6 to 9 p.m., so you note in your log “made client calls 6 to 9 p.m.” On Wednesday, your son plays the game EverQuest from 3 to 7 p.m., so you log “game or personal use 3 to 7 p.m.” Keeping this log will show what percentage you can deduct your desk, your chair, your computer, your rug, and your lamps. Thus, if you use this furniture 150 hours for business out of 200 hours during the three-month test, you could depreciate threefourths of these items. Expense New Equipment Instead of Depreciating There are, in effect, three methods of depreciation. Yes, you read that correctly! You can depreciate computers and monitors over five years and furniture over seven years. The second method, which is known as a Section 179 expense election (named after the code section that allows this), allows you to deduct the cost of the equipment immediately, rather than depreciate, up to $1,080,000 in 2022 and thereafter and 100 percent of the business useage for sport utility vehicles (SUVs) used in business through an increase in the bonus depreciation. 67 The equipment must be new to you. It can be used equipment or a used SUV as long as the equipment or SUV is new to you. Example: You buy a new computer, monitor, and printer for $2,500 and a used shredder for $1,000. (Shredders are popular in Washington and Houston.) You may depreciate the computer equipment over five years and the shredder over seven years, or you may elect to write off the entire $3,500 purchase in the year that you buy the equipment. You may make this election on most items of business equipment but not equipment used for investment purposes. Some examples of equipment used in business include desks, computers, printers, faxes, shredders, lamps, chairs, throw rugs, and cell phones and phone systems. Warning: If you expense an asset but your business use drops to under 50 percent or less during years that it would have taken to depreciate the asset, you must recalculate the original expense amount as if you had claimed the straight-line depreciation and then report the difference as taxable incomThus, for computers, you must keep the business use above 50 percent for five years, and for other office equipment, you must keep the business use above 50 percent for seven years. What if You Purchase over $1,080,000 Worth of Equipment?69 Let’s say that you want to purchase more than $1,080,000 worth of equipment in 2022. You can elect to write off up to $1,080,000 and depreciate the difference. This may sound like a great benefit, but with tax rates going up, it is questionable whether you want to take the deduction in the year of purchase rather than depreciate over five to seven years. Higher tax rates mean bigger benefits from deductions. One final point that I want to make regarding the expense election is that you actually must elect on your tax return to expense rather than depreciate. You would actually check off a box on your tax return noting that you make an election to deduct up to $1,080,000 of equipment in 2022. You don’t just take the deduction without the election. Many people make this mistake—to their dismay when the IRS finds out. If you buy over $2,700,000 of equipment in 2022 or thereafter, the $1,080,000 election phases out dollar-for-dollar over $2,700,000 in equipment purchaseThus, if you buy $2,800,000 worth of equipment, you can only elect to write-off $900,000 The Inflation Adjustment Act The Inflation Adjustment Act created two good changes for many homehowners. First, the act extended the 30% tax credit for solar panels and for other alternative energy items such as geothermal energy installation costs. This is a nice whopping tax credit that can help reduce your costs. Also, unlike that of other credits, there are no income limits. Every can get this credit by adding solar panels or utilizing geothermal energy. Secondly, There is a new high energy electric home rebate (which is like a tax credit) that was added that will provide rebates to low and middle income families who purchase energy efficient electric appliances. Sadly, Congress doesn’t usually make anything easy or simple, and they didn’t do it here either. To qualify, you family’s total annual income must be less than 150% of the median income where you live. If you meet this requirement, you can get rebates for energy saving appliances of:$840 for stoves, cooktops, ranges, ovens.$1,750 for a heat pump water heater, and$8,000 for a heat pump for space heating or cooling. There are also rebates for non-appliance upgrades such as insulation, electric wiring etc. You also can get up to $500 for converting from natural gas or propane to electric. A home office deduction is a tax-deductible gold mine. If you’re eligible, you should clearly take the deduction. Earning over $15,000 every five years should convince you that it’s worth the trouble.The best ways to ensure a home office deduction are to use your home as a principal place of business or where you meet and greet customers in the normal course of business, have a separate structure that isn’t attached to your home (such as a greenhouse or an art studio), use your home to store inventory or product samples, or run a day-care center.Audit-proof your home office by taking yearly pictures, keeping blueprints of the home that clearly show your home office square footage, and having business cards, stationery, and Yellow Pages listings of your home office address and/or phone number.Deduct all expenses for equipment that you use in your home for business, even if you never claim a home office deduction. Beating the Dreaded IRS Audit: We do not have, and never had, and could not have a “voluntary” tax system. If there is anything that you learn from this book, it is that you should be as aggressive as possible but not cheat! Did you ever notice that most Internal Revenue Service (IRS) stories about people being jailed usually are announced on television and radio from January 1 to April 15? What are you thinking about during this period? Taxes! My favorite story involves Leona Helmsley. She was convicted of 33 counts of tax evasion August 30, 1989—but not sent to a federal prison until more than two and a half years later, on the morning of tax day, April 15, 1992, the busiest filing day. This was not a coincidence. The IRS wants you to feel intimidated. The question is whether you should be intimidated or be aggressive with your deductions. The answer, for a number of reasons, is to be aggressive. — Donald C. Alexander, former IRS commissioner. Most taxpayers should be as aggressive as possible.Learn your rights on audit. (Yes, you do have some significant rights.)Learn the nine ways to reduce your chances of an IRS audit.Know the 15 steps that you should take if you are audited. (Going to Mexico for a long vacation is not one of the steps.)Learn how to collect money from the IRS by ratting on someone. This could be a lucrative opportunity.Avoid the scam artists who try to convince you that a tax return need not be filed or that taxes need not be paiBy aggressive, I do not mean cheating. I simply mean that you take any deduction that you’re reasonably entitled to. The first reason for you to be aggressive is because of the IRS person that you may encounter. Here’s what I mean. The person who’s lowest on the IRS totem pole is called the taxpayer service representative. These are the people who answer questions on the telephone. Although they’re usually quite courteous, they’re woefully under-trained. Several years ago I conducted my own survey consisting of 27 yes/no answers, and taxpayer service reps only answered 6 questions correctly. You have a better shot asking your friends. At least they have a 50-50 chance of getting the right answer. These representatives aren’t even that lucky. Normally, when the IRS hires them, they must have at least two years of college in any field; there’s no requirement for any accounting or tax course. They get training, but it’s very limited. As of several years ago, the IRS provided 20 days’ worth of training for the people who answer the phones. In many cases these people never worked for the IRS as auditors. Moreover, you take a risk in accepting any answers they give you because the IRS is not bound by their answers. You are just stuck and must pay the proper tax plus interest and penalties. Based on my experience, and based on some conversations with IRS appeals officers, you may be able to get the IRS to waive penalties if you relied on a bad answer from these people. However, you must record in a log the following:The name of the personThe badge number of the personThe date of the callThe time of the callThe question askedThe answer given If you record all these items in a log, the IRS ordinarily will waive penalties. I have found that the taxpayer service representatives will give you their badge number for identification, but they say it very quickly. I usually ask them to repeat it slowly because I’m getting older. The next person on the totem pole is an IRS tax auditor. If you’re going down to the IRS office to present your information, you will in all likelihood be visiting a tax auditor. To qualify, a tax auditor must have a four-year college degree—in anything. Tax auditors generally start at a salary of $35,000. The auditors generally are not required to interpret guidelines or engage in research. They’re told what to audit, how to audit, and almost what to think. The issues in contention are clearly defined by a classifier before the returns are assigned to individual examiners. The group manager must approve any expansion beyond that. The next rung on the ladder is the revenue agent. Revenue agents must have a fouryear college degree and a minimum of 24 semester hours of accounting. Experience can be substituted for the 24 hours of accounting. The IRS does not recruit many “A” students; they’re usually snapped up by the better-paying, big accounting firms. Sadly, many of the revenue agents squeak through college with “C” averages. In fact, one unnamed manager said that some of the people that the IRS was hiring don’t understand the tax law; thus the IRS is giving remedial reading courses to some of these people. The bottom line is that, for many audits, you will get a less competent person than found in many accounting firms. The second reason to be aggressive in your deductions is based on how IRS agents get promoted. Revenue agents are expected to be good soldiers. This is important. For the IRS system to work, revenue agents must believe that it’s their IRS, right or wrong. They learn tax law the way the IRS teaches it, as the IRS wants them to see it. Revenue agents go through extensive initial and yearly training to learn the way the IRS wants things done. They can handle some complex returns that require full use of their accounting skills. Unlike a tax auditor, the revenue agent sets the entire scope of the examination. The starting salary, however, lags seriously behind that of most accounting firms and way behind that of the major accounting firms. The key to the importance of all this is that both revenue agents and tax auditors get promoted based on the number of cases closed and not on the money collected. You might wonder why this is the case. The reason is that about 1 percent of national revenue is obtained through audits. Thus 99 percent of the revenue is gotten through “voluntary” compliance from people who have not been audited. Therefore, the more audits the IRS conducts, the greater the fear is for people who have not been audited. So there really is some logic in government. If you came to my seminar, you would find that because of the need for all agents to close their cases quickly, over 90 percent of students who have been audited in the past either got a refund or no change on an audit, or if they paid anything, there usually was a compromise or settlement. This doesn’t always happen, but it certainly happens enough to justify a lot of aggressive treatment of your deductions. The final reason for being aggressive is based on what we CPAs call the “audit lottery.” First, if your deductions go up by $5,000, $10,000, or more, you will not increase your chance of an audit. However, if your income suddenly skyrockets or triples, you might increase your chance of an audit. Second, your actual chance of an audit are about once every 30 years. The bottom line is to be as aggressive as possible. It is worth repeating here that when I say that you should be aggressive, I do not mean cheat! An aggressive taxpayer is one who has a basis in tax law for the deductions that he or she takes and has the documentation to support those deductions. Also, you will notice that the chance of being audited while self-employed is roughly seven times that of being an employee. Thus, it is CRITICAL that selfemployed taxpayers have the proper documentation suggested in this book and keep a good tax tracker such as Taxbot for all expenses and mileage. Taxpayer Rights You have significant rights as a taxpayer, and you need to be aware of those rights. As you may have seen in the Senate hearings, the IRS can exercise significant power. A good example happened many years ago. A couple ordered my Tax Strategy Program and Tax Organizer. About half an hour after my seminar was over and after they had gone home, they came back to the seminar to cancel their order. The wife was crying. What happened was that when they got home, they received a notice that the IRS had seized their bank accounts, and all their outstanding checks were bouncing. Now, without any funds left, they had to find an accountant to represent them. Good luck! Because of problems such as this, Congress passed several laws that protect taxpayers. These laws provide for the following:If you get audited, or if the IRS wants any money out of you, you must receive a copy of all your appeal rights from the examination to the collection (IRS Publication 1, “Your Rights as a Taxpayer”).You now have the right to be treated fairly, professionally, promptly, and courteously by IRS employees. This is why you may find a slightly “friendlier” IRS. However, don’t be fooled by the friendly manner: The IRS still has just as much power as in the past. You now can appeal to the Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS). This is an independent oversight group that can overturn anything that the IRS does with a Taxpayer Assistance Order (TAO). The TAS can get back money taken, lift a lien, follow up on a refund claim, and much more. Find out more about the TAS at https://www.irs.gov/taxpayer -advocate. To apply to the TAS, you’ll need to submit a statement of the facts and problem with a special IRS form, “Application for Taxpayer Assistance Order.” (You’ll love the number of this “emergency” form: It’s Form 911.)To take advantage of a TAO, you must try to resolve your dispute with the IRS through normal channels first, or you must show that you will suffer a significant hardship if a TAO is not issueA significant hardship includes any of the following conditions:3There’s an immediate threat of adverse action.There’s been a delay of more than 30 days in resolving the problem.You’ll be incurring significant costs and fees if relief isn’t granted.If relief isn’t granted, you’ll suffer irreparable injury or a long-term impact. What all this means is that you must try to deal with the IRS, but either the IRS isn’t communicating with you or you’re about to suffer a major irreparable injury such as loss of a business, inability to hire a professional to represent you because all funds are frozen, or a lien that’s destroying your credit and drastically harming your ability to function in business or in life. All this sounds great, but the IRS and the Taxpayer Advocate Service have put into practice some strict policies before you can use the taxpayer advocate. First, you need to contact the IRS and try to get it to act appropriately if the agency is wrong. You generally must write to the IRS three times, and you can’t have received within the last 30 days a notice that agents are working on your problem. Also, you should show that the IRS clearly acted improperly or that you have a very winnable case or that an irreparable injury will occur, as noted earlier. The following is an actual case. Example: A couple called me who had sold their business to their ex-partner. Subsequently, the partner never paid the IRS any withholding taxes. The IRS seized the couple’s bank accounts and garnished their wages, leaving them with $150 per week on which to live. They hired a lawyer who charged $5,000 and accomplished nothing. They then called me out of desperation. I recommended that they contact the Taxpayer Advocate Service with a cover letter noting that they had previously sold their business and include a copy of the sales agreement, garnishment notice, and bank seizure notice. Several months later, I received a bouquet of roses with a letter of thanks: They had got back all their money, and the seizure had been lifted. This whole unfortunate situation cost them $5,035—$5,000 for the lawyer, $10 for the Federal Express notice to the Taxpayer Advocate Service, and $25 for the roses to me. Had they known about the TAS, they would have saved a lot of money and suffered a lot less frustration and stress. Here are some other rights in an audit:You have the right to have your personal and financial information kept confidential and the right to know why the IRS is asking for the information, how any information will be used, and what might happen if you don’t provide the information.You clearly have the right to plan your business and personal finances in such a way that you will pay the least tax that is due under the law. Thus the IRS states that you can plan your transactions to try to reduce your taxes. Tax planning is fully accepted by the IRS as long as you are using legitimate techniques.You also have the right to audio-record the audit. You must bring your own audio equipment and give the IRS at least 10 days’ notice of your desire to record the audit. The IRS can record you as well. I do not ordinarily recommend recording the audit. The reason is that audits are negotiating sessions, so recording makes the auditor nervous. The IRS is putting more auditors on cases that involved recorded audits, and settlements tend to be fewer. I would, however, record an audit if you get a bad auditor, such as someone who appears to want to “nail” you or disallows a lot more in deductions than you think is warranted. You can stop the audit and request a postponement to get a recorder and some tapes, to obtain some representation, or to consult with an advisor.You can ask that the examination take place at a reasonable time and in a place that is convenient to both you and the IRS.You can request that the IRS not examine your return for the same items it examined in either of the two previous years if no change in your liability was proposed. Thus you can effectively end harassment on the same issue(s).You also can recover some litigation expenses (currently up to $150 per hour) if you substantially prevail in the dispute and the IRS does not show that its position was justified.5You have the right to enter into an installment agreement, which means paying your taxes over a period of months or years, if you don’t have the money to pay the tax at present.You also have the right to claim Innocent Spouse Tax Relief if the IRS goes after you for something that arose from your ex-spouse if you filed a joint return. If you file jointly with your spouse, you are jointly and separately liable for the taxes due. Frequently, couples get divorced, yet the IRS goes after one ex-spouse for a tax problem resulting from the other. Now you can elect Innocent Spouse Tax Relief, which is your right to be taxed on your share of the income and deductions and not be taxed on your spouse’s problems. You also can elect this relief if you can prove that you were an abused spouse and were forced into signing a joint return. This sounds great, but in practice there are some problems. You can’t have known or should not have known about the potential problems of your spouse. The following examples will illustrate this point. Example: Unknown to you, your spouse was a drug dealer. Despite having a nice state government job, you lived in a million-dollar home and drove a Mercedes. The IRS probably will hold that you should have known something was amiss and will not allow Innocent Spouse Tax Relief. Example: You knew that your spouse had a part-time business that you were told made $10,000. However, your spouse really made $100,000 and placed the money into a separate account. You probably will be able to elect Innocent Spouse Tax Relief on all the earnings above the $10,000 that you knew about. Nine Ways to Reduce Your Chances of an IRS Audit Before I begin this discussion, you should know what happens to your tax return when you send it to the IRS. First, it goes to the local service center, where it’s scanned and checked for math errors and with all Form 1099s to see if you underreported income. Your return is then sent to the Martinsburg, West Virginia, center, where it’s given a score using a computer program known as the Discriminant Function System (DIF). The higher the score, the better is the chance that your return will be examined immediately for problems. However, if you’ve attached schedules and statements explaining the problem in more detail, the examiner may put your return back into the hopper, and you may totally avoid an audit. Although this program is the best-kept secret in government (better kept, in fact, than the making of the atomic bomb), there are some things that we know about this program that you can use to reduce the risk of an audit. 1. Mail your return either by registered mail, return receipt requested, Federal Express, or electronically. If the IRS regional service center fails to receive your tax return, your chances of being audited increase automatically. To make sure that you’re not taking unnecessary chances, send your tax return by registered mail, return receipt requested, or by Federal Express Priority Overnight or Second Day service, DHL Same Day and Overnight Worldwide Express, Airborne Express (either overnight or next-day service), or by electronic filinMost returns are now filed electronically, but there are still some who use the paper version for their tax return. I would recommend electronic filing for everyone. It will assure that the correct social security number is used as well as assuring that the IRS will get your tax return since you will get an electronic receipt. 2. Send all changes of address to the IRS by filing Form 8822, “Change of Address,” whenever you move. As reported in USA Today several years ago, the IRS wants to send out $78 million in refunds, but the people have moved, and it can’t find them. (Maybe I’m crazy, but if the situation were reversed and the IRS wanted money from you, don’t you think that it would find you?) The IRS likes to know where you are and appreciates being notified of any change of address. This certainly will benefit you if the IRS needs to notify you. If you move, you may be liable to the IRS without knowing it because you didn’t provide a change of address. Its only responsibility is to send you all notices to your last known address. 3. Use the IRS’s preaddressed label to speed up the processing of your tax return. There are rumors to the effect that the IRS label contains information that will be detrimental to you. To the best of my knowledge, this is not the case. This label is only used to expedite processing. 4. Make sure that your tax return is neat. I met a taxpayer who thought that if the IRS couldn’t read the return, it wouldn’t audit him. This is absolutely false! Although your taxreturn doesn’t have to be typed, it must be neat and easy to read. Legible tax returns create an impression of attention to detail. In addition, you don’t want your return to stand out in any way. 5. File all elections that you’re entitled to. There are certain tax breaks and options that require the filing of an election, such as expensing equipment instead of depreciating equipment. Sometimes the filing can be done merely by picking a method of reporting. It’s generally better to attach separate statements for all elections made in a tax return or to check all required boxes on the return. This further supports the impression of attention to detail and shows an understanding of the tax law. Again, the key is to have your return look professional and complete. You don’t want it to stand out for any reason or have something clearly amiss that would cause increased IRS scrutiny. 6. Report all of your income. The IRS has implemented various audit programs for unreported income. Make sure that your tax return reports all income you earned and identifies the income by source. If you receive a Form 1099 for consulting services, for example, report the income on a supporting schedule, and include the taxpayer ID number from the Form 1099. Since the IRS already has the information from the 1099, you’ll reduce your chances of being selected for an audit by enabling the IRS to match the Form 1099 information with your tax return. In addition, if you’re incorporated, be sure that the Form 1099s match the entity that earns the income. Many people never notice that income earned by their corporation has their social security number on the Form 1099, and vice versa. If you receive an incorrect Form 1099, immediately notify the sender to give you an amended Form 1099. If you can’t get this, attach a schedule explaining that there’s a difference between what was reported and what is shown on the Form 1099. 7. Have your return prepared by a competent tax preparer. Most people are not aware that if they do their own returns, they increase their chances of an audit because the IRS perceives that they don’t know as much as an accountant who prepares hundreds of returns. Moreover, accountants who prepare lots of returns use sophisticated software that ensures fewer errors. If you really want to save money on the cost of the preparation of your return, use Turbo Tax or some tax-preparation software, and then give your return to an accountant to get his or her name on it as the preparer. You may cut the costs of preparation—and the accountant may find things that you missed. In addition, I would recommend a CPA, an enrolled agent, or an attorney prepare or review the return. This will help to minimize your chances of an audit examination. 8. Break your income and large expenses into small segments. Income reported to the IRS on Form 1099s should be separated from other income. The separation will help to determine that you’ve indeed reported all income earned. Also break down expenses as far as possible to explain to the IRS examiners exactly what was involved in the expenses. If, for example, you had promotional expenses of $10,000 and that’s all that appeared on your tax return, your chances of audit would be significant. However, should your promotion be broken down into travel, advertising, and entertainment expenses, you may reduce your chances of audit. I should note that certain big-ticket items need not be broken down because the IRS understands that these particular items are inherently large. An example of this type of large item would be medical malpractice premiums for doctors. 9. Keep records of expert advice. If you relied on the advice of your accountant or lawyer, keep records as to the nature and date of the advice. There are cases in7which penalties have been waived for a good-faith reliance on an independent expert. 15 Steps for Preparing for an IRS Audit Let’s assume that you follow to the letter everything that is written in this book, but you still get a notice from the IRS that invites you down for a “chat.” Don’t panic or go on an extended vacation. Here are 15 steps that will help you greatly in the audit process. 1. Assume that you will be audited whenever you prepare your tax return. The time to get ready for an IRS audit is while you’re preparing your tax return. This is the only time that you have all your tax information in front of you. Reference your support to the return so that you can find it later, if you should need it. Questionable items, if any, should be supported by tax memorandums or other information from your tax advisor. 2. Don’t panic. An audit notice doesn’t indicate that anything is wrong with your tax return. It’s simply a request by the IRS to find out if your tax return was prepared properly and to determine the proper amount of tax—no more and no less. Generally, you’ll be notified of the audit by mail, although you could be telephoned. If you’re notified by mail, you’ll be asked to telephone the examiner. 3. Try to limit the scope of the audit. There are a number of suggestions here. In an IRS office audit, the IRS tells you what’s being examined and sets the scope of the audit. In addition, the IRS generally has three years from the date you file your return to audit it. Many times, an audit occurs in the last year allowed or the audit takes longer than usual, and the time limit may run out. In these cases, IRS agents usually ask taxpayers to extend the statute by a year so that it can continue the audit. Your first reaction may be to deny this request, but the IRS simply will disallow many deductions, and you’ll be stuck in IRS appeals or, even worse, in court. The best thing that you can do is to negotiate an extension, but only regarding specific items on your return, such as for travel or for entertainment. The reason for limiting the scope of the extension is that if the IRS finds anything after the time limit for the audit expires, it can’t assess anything against you except for those items that you agreed to extend. 4. Understand that the burden of proof is on you. Tax law requires you to prove that your deductions are valid and that you have paid the proper amount of tax. The IRSneed prove nothing. When going through your records and getting ready for the audit, make sure that you keep in mind that the burden is on you. None of that “innocent until proven guilty” business applies to a tax audit, unless there’s a potential criminal investigation. 5. Dress normally for the audit. Do not make a special trip to Goodwill Industries to buy clothes for your audit. Don’t wear expensive clothes or jewelry such as Rolex watches. IRS examiners dislike people who look like they make more money than the examiners. Dress and act normally during the entire audit. Do not plead poverty or stupidity. Excuses don’t work. 6. Be on time for the audit. Put an asterisk here, and burn this point into your head. IRS examiners are graded on efficiency. If you are late for your appointment and cause the auditor to be inefficient or to take a longer time on the audit than he or she should, you start the audit in an antagonistic environment. Moreover, IRS examiners start examining your return to see what the problems are about a half hour before the audit is scheduled to begin. If you’re late for the appointment, you give the auditor extra time to scrutinize your records before the audit begins. Thus the bottom line is that if you’re late, you irritate the auditor and allow more time to find problems. The best bet: Be early. 7. Bring organized information. Make sure that you’re prepared to answer questions and deliver documents to the auditor. If you receive notification from the IRS about the documents that you need for the audit, make sure that they are organized so that you not only can answer the questions but also can deliver the supporting documents quickly. This helps the examiner to complete the audit more efficiently, get a better rating from his or her superiors, and bring the whole unpleasant task to a quick conclusion. 8. Don’t volunteer information. Although I recommend that your accountant show up for the audit without you, sometimes your presence is necessary. If you attend the audit, there are only four statements that you should make. They are “Yes,” “No,” “I don’t know,” and finally, my favorite—“It’s my accountant’s fault.” (Enron managers learned this technique very well.) Never say, “I’ve always done it that way.” Don’t elaborate; answer only questions asked. Be concise. If the question does not appear relevant, ask why it is being asked. Bring only the documents requested in the IRS’s “invitation” letter. Do not volunteer any information during the audit process. Finally, be very careful what you say to an IRS agent. This information can be used in a criminal tria9. Don’t leave any ends dangling. I had a student who was being audited and found that she didn’t have $500 worth of receipts for certain deductions. She asked me if she should point this out to the auditor before the audit begins. The answer? Absolutely not! If the examiner gets money out of you very easily, he or she may decide to dig deeper, and you’ll end up losing your tail. Thus, if it’s easy to find something wrong, the immediate conclusion is that there must be lots of other things wrong in your return. 10. Ask for tax law references. If you think that you’re right, ask the auditor or agent for the legal references. Don’t accept vague statements or interpretations of the law. Make your tax advisor the goat by saying, “My accountant told me that this deduction was proper. Can you give me something that shows he’s wrong?” 11. Don’t give in too quickly. Most people feel that if you give in quickly, the IRS audit will go faster, and the agent will like you. Nothing could be further from the truth. The IRS manual states, “Hasty agreement to adjustments and undue concern about immediate closing of the case may indicate that more thorough examination is needed.” If you appear to be a soft touch, the IRS will look for larger contributions from you. 12. Never be alone with a Special Agent. Special Agents are not special. Their job is to investigate criminal actions. If there are ever two agents to see you, ask whether either of them is a Special Agent. If so, terminate the meeting, and seek out a good criminal tax lawyer. You’ve probably learned that “if you are nice to people, they are nice to you.” This isn’t true for Special Agents. They’re promoted based on indictments. Thus, unlike with a regular IRS examiner, do not be nice or accommodating to Special Agents. I also should note that there’s no privilege protecting your communications with your accountanAccordingly, never hire an accountant to represent you in criminal matters. In addition, you should terminate your relationship with your accountant for a while because the IRS in a criminal investigation can obtain any communications to the accountant. If you need to deal and communicate with the accountant, have the attorney hire the accountant so that any future conversation is protected under the attorney-client privilege. 13. Don’t ever tamper with the evidence. No backdating of documents or intimidating of witnesses should ever occur. More people get indicted for these items than for the original offense because they are easier to prove. To be safe, don’t contact any witnesses for the government; let your lawyer do it. 14. Never, ever die. The IRS audits approximately 68 percent of all final returns. The only good thing about dying is that you may not have to show up at the audit. 15. Be careful of the “rat fee.” The IRS pays a 10 percent commission for people to rat on you. If you want to make a living reporting tax cheats, get Publication 733, “Rewards for Information Given to the Internal Revenue Service.” Taxes Are Not Voluntary and Are Very Constitutional In recent years, charlatans have gotten a lot of attention by claiming that taxes are unconstitutional and can be avoided with pure trusts or foreign trusts. You may have heard a well-dressed speaker declare that there have been many cases to this effect and that he or she has personally beaten the IRS in court on several occasions.Who wouldn’t want to avoid all federal and state taxes? However, before you invest your hard-earned money to create various recommended trusts, not to mention your life savings in a foreign or pure trust (otherwise known as a constitutional trust), stop and reconsider! Here’s the real story. Here you’ll find out what companies that promote these concepts are not telling you. The only bit of truth to all these claims happened in the year 1895. In that year, the U.S. Supreme Court, in Pollock v. Farmers’ Loan & Trust Company,10 held that the Income Tax Act at the time was unconstitutional. However, what is not revealed by many seminar speakers on this subject is that in 1913 the country ratified the 16th Amendment to the Constitution to correct this problem and specifically overruled PollocThis amendment gave Congress the power “to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source derived” and allowed passage of the Income Tax Act of 1913, which was the predecessor to the current Internal Revenue CodSince that time, there have been numerous attempts to get the courts to hold that the Internal Revenue Code is unconstitutionaSome of the arguments have been that the 16th Amendment was ratified incorrectlTaxpayers even have tried to avoid paying tax on religious groundWhat is important to know is that all taxpayer attempts have failed! In fact, the courts are so tired of hearing these frivolous arguments that they are now assessing the government’s legal fees against the taxpayers who claim this, as well as upholding the IRS’s imposition of a special frivolous return penaltIn fact, even the penalty for filing a frivolous return was held to be constitutionaThe bottom line is that the Income Tax Act and the Internal Revenue Code are quite constitutional, and Congress can enact almost any tax law as long as there’s a rational basis. The next major argument by many of these “tax protest” speakers is that you can avoid income tax by maintaining all assets and income in either a pure trust (otherwise known as a family estate trust) or a foreign trust. These types of trusts usually involve the transfer of your assets to a trust in a foreign jurisdiction with a corresponding assignment of lifetime services to the trust. These trusts usually pay fees and living expenses such as your rent and make other distributions of income. Sadly, this has been at best a waste of thousands of dollars to set up and at worst a dangerous loss of all assets placed in trust. As many of these speakers note, these types of trusts are not subject to income tax. In fact, this is true! What they neglect to say is that all the income of the trust is taxed to the grantor (you) who set up the trust18 if you meet any of the following conditions:You can revoke the trust.You can derive income from the trust.You can control the trust. Thus, if you keep any control whatsoever, you are taxed on the income. In addition, even if you were willing to give up the requisite control, income from trusts reaches the higher tax brackets faster than individual income. You actually could be increasing your taxes. Moreover, if you place your assets out of the United States, you will not be subject to any U.S. legal protections if the assets are embezzled, which happens all too often. The bottom line is simple: Whenever you hear someone tell you, “Psst! Taxes are unconstitutional and can be avoided with some trust,” run away as fast as you can! Always remember that the difference between tax avoidance and tax evasion is five years! Be as aggressive with your deductions as possible.Understand and use your taxpayer rights when audited.Learn the nine ways to reduce your chances of being audited.Understand the 15 steps that you should apply if you get audited.Study IRS Publication 733 if you want to collect the “rat fee” from the IRS.Avoid all scam artists or tax protesters with various devices and claims that taxes need not be paid or that taxes are unconstitutional. How to Shield Yourself from the IRS Weapon of Classifying a Business as a Hobby I have trouble reconciling my net income with my gross habits. The reason is that classifying an activity as a hobby instead of a business is the Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS’s) favorite weapon because it yields such nice results for the IRS. Huge Benefits in Business Losses Being in business is the last great tax-reduction opportunity. If your business produces a loss, you generally may deduct that loss against any form of incomThis loss can be used against your interest, dividends, rents, retirement income, and even your spouse’s income if you file a joint return. —Errol Flynn, actor. Understand the huge benefits of business losses.Learn why the favorite IRS weapon against taxpayers is to classify an activity as a hobby rather than a business.Learn when the IRS is required to presume that you are in business.Learn about the election that requires the IRS to postpone any determination.Learn about the criteria to be deemed a business and not a hobby.Learn how to bulletproof your activities from being classified as a hobby. (This one concept will pay for this book alone.) 112This should ensure that you never get divorced. However, what happens if your losses exceed your total family income for the year? Prior to 2018, if your losses exceeded your income for the year, you could carry back the losses two years2 and receive a refund from the federal government and most state governments for the taxes paid in the last two years. If you wished, you could also carry forward all business losses over the next 20 years3 and offset these losses over any income generated over the next 20 years into the future. As a result of the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA), the treatment of business losses has changed. You no longer can carry back any losses to prior years, which might hurt new business start-ups that need the cash. However, losses incurred by self-employed taxpayers or in S corporations with sufficient stock basis can be used against any form of income that you currently have in the year of loss. If the loss exceeds your income for the year, you can carry forward all unused losses indefinitely to the future and offset up to 80 percent of future taxable income until you have used up all the losses that were carried to the future. Thus you never lose a valid business deduction. Example: David incurs a $10,000 loss from his business. If he earns $40,000 in wages from his full-time job, his taxable income would be $30,000. He thus would pay tax on only $30,000 of income. The IRS Works to Treat Activities as Hobbies This all assumes that the IRS treats your activities as a business. If, however, the IRS determines that you are not engaged in the activities to make a profit, then no deduction for losses is alloweThus prior to 2018, deductions from the hobby were limited to the income from the hobby. In addition, no carryover of losses or carryback of losses from the hobby was allowe(OUCH!) Finally, if this isn’t bad enough, we now maybe have inadvertently created even more of a problem for hobbyists. Prior to the TCJA, hobby deductions were only available as a miscellaneous itemized deductions. The new law eliminates all miscellaneous itemized deductions,6 which could result in the loss of all of your deductions yet include any hobby earnings as taxable. OUCH! It is thus absolutely crucial to run your business like a business and NOT like a hobby. Meeting with your tax professional yearly to help ensure that your endeavor is classified as a business will be a very important thing to do, especially if your endeavor is “an inherently suspicious activity such as a network marketing business and other activities that I have noted below.” It is also important for you to thoroughly understand what I have written in this chapter. Example: Carrie has a side business in travel that she operates out of her home. She spends little time operating the business, and it generates little revenue. If the IRS classifies her activities as a hobby, all losses from that business are disallowed and potentially all of her deductions might be disallowed as well.Presumption Based on Profit There’s a safe harbor where activities are presumed to be a business. Congress has given you a way to help solidify your business as a business so that the IRS doesn’t treat it as a hobby. If your activity shows a profit for any three or more years in a period of five consecutive tax years, you are presumed to be engaged in a businesIf you’re engaged in breeding, showing, training, or racing horses, this presumption test becomes a little bit better: two or more years in a period of seven consecutive tax yearEven if you’re not involved with horses, if you meet this presumption, you are usually home-free with the IRS. Election to Postpone Any Determination If the IRS comes after you to disallow your losses before the full five years (or seven years for a horse-related business), you may elect to postpone any determination of being a business or a hobby until there are five consecutive tax years from the time that you first engaged in the activity (seven years for a horse-related business, as noted earlier).9 You generally must make this election within three years of the due date of your tax return for the year in which you first started your activitYou can even make this election after the IRS notifies you about this problem, as long as it’s within the three-year period and you make this election within 60 days of the IRS notice. If the IRS files a suit, no election is available under any circumstanceExample: If you started your business in June 2020, you must make the election by April 15, 2024 (within three years of the due date of your 2014 return). If, however, the IRS had notified you about this problem on June 1, 2020, you would have had to make this election by August 1, 2014 (within 60 days of the IRS notice). At first glance, you may think that this election is very useful and should be used. However, there are several problems with making this election to postpone any hobby determination. First, it calls unwanted attention to yourself. Second, it extends the statute of limitations for several years for the IRS to both catch you and go after you. In short, weigh the pros and cons before making this election. Criteria for Being a Business, Not a Hobby So you didn’t have a profit three out of five years. In fact, you may have losses for many years in the future. All is not lost. If you follow the criteria that I outline below, you’ll be much more bulletproof: The IRS won’t be able to treat your activities as a hobby. A large number of my students have won with the IRS after using these time-tested strategies. If you are in network marketing, have a small business, or operate a homebased business on the side, take all these strategies to heart. You will thank me forever and save yourself an enormous amount of hassle and money.There are numerous standards that the courts use in determining whether your activity constitutes a business or a hobby. Generally, the determination is based on the facts and circumstances of each casHowever, some planning certainly will help your facts enormously. One important factor is that you must show that you entered into the activity with the objective of making a profiThis is true even if the chance of making a profit is smalThe majority of court decisions (as well as those of the IRS) indicate that you’re required to have an honest profit objective when you undertake your venture. Thus, if you have a sincere purpose of eventually reaping an overall profit, you will be deemed to have a profit motivIt is your motives at the time that you start your endeavor that determine whether you have business intent. This can change as time goes on, but the motive at the startup becomes crucial. If you’re in network marketing or franchising, you should document this intent by sending a letter to your sponsor/company to express your reasons for entering this business, emphasizing your desire to make a long-term profit and career out of this activity. If you have a small business on the side, you should document your intent with studies that show why you started this business. This point will be discussed below. The courts have looked at the following factors in deciding if an endeavor is a business or a hobby: 1. Business plan and projections and a budget. Most court decisions have looked favorably on taxpayers who prepare business plans showing projected estimated income and expenses of their endeavoIn fact, this is such an important criterion that some cases have turned just on this factor alone. Thus, in one case,17 a sailboat chartering business was held to be a business even with years of losses because the owners had 12 years of projections of anticipated revenues and expenses and projected an overall profit. They also showed a reasonable basis for the appreciation of the sailboat. The key is to project an overall business profit. In addition, the projected numbers should have some reasonable basis in reality. You therefore should document how you estimated each of your figures and have projections for at least 5 years, with 10 years being even better. In addition, don’t have your business plan showing only estimated loss with no eventual profiIt is also crucial that you prepare a budget that shows that you met with an accountant or some business expert and tried to cut expenses as much as possible in order to attempt to increase your profitabilitDespite the importance of these factors, most taxpayers who have lost in court did not have a business plan with projected revenues and expenses. This is especially true for people involved in network marketing. Thus, when preparing this plan, you should seek out an expert who has been successful in your business and have him or her help you with this plan. In network marketing, seek out the experience of a very successful person in your upline or, even better, in some other line, and document this help. If you have a small business, find an expert in the field to help you prepare this plan. Thereare always people who are “expert consultants” in just about any field of endeavor. Also, if your business involves inventories, you certainly should have enough inventory on hand to meet your goals. 2. Your own statements. Telling your friends that you’re in business to make a profit usually is deemed too self-serving to be of any use in proving a business motive. However, if you make improper statements, the court may treat your activities as a hobby and kill your deductions. For example, one person who raised dogs argued at a local zoning hearing for his home that his dog-breeding activities constituted a hobbThe IRS used these words against the taxpayer, and the court held that his dog-breeding activity was indeed a hobby. Thus don’t ever say, “I’m in this only to save taxes” or “I’m in this only to get a discount and save costs.” This may be partly true, but don’t say it. 3. Conducting the activities in a business-like manner. This is probably the single most important factor that the IRS uses in judging a business intent. You must conduct your activity in a business-like manner and run it similarly to other businesses of the same size and typThus you need to consult with experts about how similar businesses are run and follow their advice. It’s also crucial to keep complete and accurate books and records and keep a good tax organizer or diarConsulting with experts seems to be a crucial factor that the courts look at especially if you aren’t making money. This involves not only consulting with experts about ways to increase sales but also meeting with your accountant to discuss expenses that can be cut back in order to achieve greater profitability. 23 It is crucial that you keep separate bank accounts and records for your business. The key is not just to keep details of expenses and receipts but to have a “bookkeeping systemthat provides sufficient data for you to make informed business decisions.”24 These records must enable you to evaluate and improve your performance. What this means is that you should have the following:25A business plan showing at least 5 and preferably 10 years of projected income and expenses, showing an overall projected profit.A marketing plan that is changed yearly to conform with what is happening.A yearly income statement and balance sheet so that you can determine what is happening in your business and can make changes to improve profitability.In addition, if you have losses, have your accountant review your financial statements yearly in order to suggest expenses that can be cut in order to try to produce a profiIf you’re not making money, you should seek advice from people as to what changes you should make in your marketing and then follow through on the advice. Of course, you should document this advice. If you are in network marketing, don’t just ask your upline people. Speak to different successful people to get different ideas. Don’t follow the same advice from year to year if you aren’t making moneBusinesses change the ways they market if they’re not successful. The following is a listing of activities, in addition to what was noted earlier, and the records that the courts found sufficient to enable a determination of being a business:Horse breeding. A registry of all horses bred or foaled, formal breeding, and complete breeding and medical recordShowing of horses. Detailed notes on horses and horse show judgeDog breeding. Detailed records of the dogs, as required by the American Kennel Club, that allowed the taxpayer to determine the profitability of each doThis includes records of dogs bred and sold, the prices received for each dog, and the expenses incurred for each dog. Copies of advertisements showing an attempt to sell dogs and make money are also essential. Some cases have not mandated that you need these detailed records, but I would recommend them to be safe.Charter boat operations. An engine log, an expense log, and a revenue log indicating every financial and mechanical activity and all maintenance that the taxpayer conducted on the boaI would certainly keep a time log of business usage of the boat and a guest log. For network marketing,32 in addition to keeping separate bank accounts, a tax diary, and profit and loss statements, I would keep all required receipts for travel and diary entries for appointments and meetings. I would note everyone to whom I gave marketing materials, such as tapes. If inventory is necessary, I certainly would keep some kind of inventory records and keep records that would show what was sold, given away, or used personally because personal consumption is not deductible. It is also imperative to have some form of budget, business plan, or breakeven analysis showing how much you need to sell in order to cover expenses and start showing a profit. If questioned, you should be able to explain in detail when your activity would become profitablWithout question, network marketing has been held to be a business; however, there seems to be a higher burden with this business and with raising dogs and horses because of the popularity and social nature of these specific businesses. This may not be fair, but it’s just the way it is. The key is to always try to make money and show the IRS that at least you’re making a real effort, with daily activity, decent books and records, a business and marketing plan showing how much you need to sell or recruit to make money, and changes to your marketing, with the help of outside experts, if you have a loss. 4. Conducting the activities like a similar profitable business. It’s essential that you show that you’re carrying on your business like other similar businesses that are profitablHere is where the principle of duplication is critical. If you conduct your activity like other successful people in the same business, you have a very strong argument that you’ve conducted your activity like a business with the expectation of making a profit. In addition, if you follow the path of successful people, you also improve yourchances of becoming successful. You actually might make a lot of money. You therefore want to adopt marketing efforts that are similar to those that are working for successful businesseThus, you should do the following:Advertise your business in the Yellow Pages. Use the same ads in the same papers as other successful people have used. Get copies of their ads.Have business cards and stationery with your business name and address.Use a variety of marketing strategies used by successful people. Don’t stick to the same thing year after year if it doesn’t worThis factor may seem similar to item 3, but there’s a difference. You not only want to run your business in a business-like manner as noted in item 3, but you also want to run it the same way as people who’ve succeeded in similar ventures. The more you can show that you’ve copied the marketing and duties of successful people, the greater is your case for being deemed a business and not a hobby. 5. Prior business experiences. If you have prior business experience in this industry or with your product or service, this can make a big difference to the IRS. If you have no prior experience in this activity, your profit motive is more questionablHowever, if you have no prior experience, don’t be forlorn. You can overcome this deficiency with extensive study, listening to training tapes, taking seminars, and attending training meetings. Some cases have looked favorably on taxpayers who take courses at the start of their business in order to get the training needed for success. “You can never get enough training” is an old adage to live by when you are trying to make profit. Document in your tax organizer any training that you attended or educational tapes that you heard. You can never get enough training! If you get help or suggestions from successful people or experts related to your field, document what was said and who helped you in your tax organizer or diary. 6. Advance research into the venture. If you were to buy a franchise or invest thousands in a business or investment, wouldn’t you check it out first? Few good people start businesses without a good prior investigation of the business and any related companies. It’s essential, therefore, that you investigate any business that you’re considering before you get involved in iMany people ask me what should be done to conduct such an investigation. My suggestions depend on the type of business. If you’re considering a franchise or network marketing distributorship, contact the Better Business Bureau in the area where the home company is located, and get a report in writing. Contact some franchisees/distributors and document what they tell you. Check out their products and see if you like them, see if they work, get copies of any reports on the products or any testing, etc. If you want to breed dogs, horses, or other animals, consult with experts in this area about how to run this type of business and what exactly you should be doing. The key is to consult with experts39 consistently to keep improving your profitability and to follow what successful people are doing. The IRS doesn’t care if you make money or not as long as you’re trying to make a profit. Keep this in mind. 7. Devoting some time regularly to the activity. Although you certainly do not need to conduct your business full time, the more time and effort you put in, the better. Cases have shown that as little as one hour a day on average was sufficient to be deemed regular enough for a profit motivThe more time that you devote to your endeavor, the better the chance that the endeavor will be classified as a business and not as a hobby. It seems that working one or two hours a day or more is much more important than doing nothing one week and working 20 to 30 hours the next week. Regularity seems to be important to both the IRS and tax court judges. 8. History of income/losses and measures to improve profits. Without question, your expenses certainly can exceed your income in a business. However, absent unforeseen circumstances,41 such as theft, fire, flood, and sudden market changes, you should do everything reasonably possible to turn your losses into profitYou should use common sense in running your business. For example, watch out for expenses that are unreasonably excessive in comparison with income. In one case, for example, a network marketing distributor’s accounting fees alone exceeded his entire gross income. His travel also was 20 times his gross income. Other expenses also were very higIn fact, the one taxpayer paid $2,300 in security expenses to cover $300 worth of inventorThe bottom line is to use your common sense in how much you spend and on what. Based on my numerous discussions with various IRS personnel, it seems that this concept of using excessive, unreasonable expenses as a test for a “lack of business profit motive” has been applied to a variety of endeavors. For example, one who enters the travel business and tries to deduct all his or her “familiarization trips” (otherwise known as “fam” trips), despite earning very little gross income and making little attempt to sell vacation travel, would have a tough time establishing that these trips have a profit motive. This is especially true if the cost of each trip is greater than the gross income from the entire endeavor. In addition, some recent IRS cases have noted that although you do not have to make a profit, you should have some gross income during the year. Judges and the IRS just don’t believe that any business can have zero gross income if someone is truly trying to make a profit. Thus, if you have zero gross income, you may well be deemed a hobby despite all the preceding discussion. 9. Income from other sources. The amount of income from other sources is used to help determine your profit motive. Although it may not seem fair, the greater your income from other sources or other businesses or jobs, the less likely it is that your loss from your activity may be deemed a business losAlthough this certainly is not a determinative factor, if you have substantial income from other activities, you need to more closely dot your is and cross your ts. If you follow everything that I have discussed here, you can be a billionaire and still have your side venture be deemed a business. 10. Suspicious activities. Watch out for certain activities that the IRS considers inherently more suspect because they involve significant personal pleasurThese include:Antique collectingStamp collectingTravel businessWritingMinisterial dutiesRecord recordingRaising show horsesTraining and showing dogsAutomobile racingNetwork marketing If you’re engaged in one of these activities, you must pay careful attention to the other “business versus hobby” factors mentioned. I’ve had hundreds of students who were audited because of questions about their activities being a business and have prevailed, getting their losses allowed for years! If you follow everything that I’ve said in this chapter, you’ll have the peace of mind of being bulletproof against one of the IRS’s favorite weapons. Losses from businesses can be used against any income in current year, or carried forward indefinitely for up to 80 percent of future taxable income until all losses are used up. No deductions seem to be allowable for hobbies. This is why classifying an activity as a hobby is the IRS’s favorite weapon.Try to have a profit in at least three of five consecutive years. This is not mandatory, but it’s nice to have because it will provide evidence of your profit motive.An election is available to postpone a determination of the status of your activities as a business or as a hobby. Generally, don’t bother making this election.Document business intent by sending a letter to your manager, sponsor, or franchising company to express your reasons for entering the business, emphasizing your desire to make a long-term profitable career out of this activity.Have a business plan showing at least 5 and preferably 10 years of projections for revenues and expenses.If your business involves inventory, always have enough on hand to justify your goals and the business plan.Don’t make any improper statements such as, “I’m in this endeavor only to save taxes” or “ to cut costs” or “ to get my products at a discount.”Keep accurate books and records, which should include a tax organizer or diary with your daily contacts and activities. Also have yearly balance sheet and income statements prepared to help you improve your performance. Finally, keep separate bank accounts and inventory records of costs, sales, and products given away as samples or personally consumed, etc.At least yearly, consult with experts to find out what successful people are doing to make money in businesses similar to your own. Document who the expert was and what he or she said.Use advertising, telephone listings, business cards, and stationery with your business name, address, and telephone number.If you’re not making money, change the way you market your business. It’s essential that you try different documented approaches.Before entering your business, conduct an investigation of the industry and of any companies that you’re thinking of associating with. At the least, you should get a Better Business Bureau report on any company that you’re considering representing. Document your steps in this investigation.Keep getting trained and seeking tips on operating and improving your business. This shows that you’re really interested in making a profit.It’s much more important to work your business regularly, such as one or two hours a day, than once every two weeks for 20 hours. You should note all activities and appointments in your tax organizer or diary.If you have losses, meet with your accountant about costs that can be cut that won’t negatively affect your business. Going over your financial statements becomes very important.Clearly document reasons for making any business trips.Try to have at least some gross income. You don’t need to make money, but you should have some sales or commissions during the year.Be especially careful if you’re engaged in one of the inherently suspicious activities. How to Incorporate to Shelter Your Wealth: This page intentionally left blank 9 Finding the Best Corporate Entity for Your Business The beginning is the most important part of the work. —Plato, The Republic What was true for Plato 2,500 years ago still holds true today. What determines how much you can use in fringe benefits and losses, not to mention how much you can limit liabilities and how easily you can raise capital, is your business entity. Moreover, even if an entity is great for you now, you may wish to change it as time goes by. For example, you may want to start off as a sole proprietor but later raise more capital and incorporate. Thus you will need to keep track of your “proper” business entity on a continuing basis if you want to make your life less taxing. If you are not a specified service business such as a law firm, accounting firm, real estate. Learn why your initial choice of a business entity is so important.Use a great flowchart that will easily demonstrate which entity is best for you.Know the pros and cons of a sole proprietorship and why it’s an ideal entity for network marketers.Learn about partnerships and why these generally should be avoided.Know the benefits of being an S corporation and how this one entity can eliminate up to 40 percent of your Social Security taxes.Learn why a limited-liability corporation is one of the most highly recommended entities for most business owners.Learn about when to form a regular corporation (C corporation) and, more important, when not to.Learn which entity is best if you have co-owners or partners and about the one document that’s crucial to your long-term success. Entity selection flowchart. An S corporation becomes much more desirable if you are self-employed and earning over $170,050 of taxable income as a single taxpayer or over $340,100 of taxable income and married, since the pass-through deduction may start to phase out at these levels of income without having some wages to reduce the offset. S corporation salaries are deemed wages: even salaries to you and your family are counted. .management or brokerage firm, financial services firm, consulting firm, medical or health care or veterinary firm, athlete, or any business in which the principal asset of the business is the reputation or skill of one or more of its employees. Let’s begin by discussing the advantages and disadvantages of your entity options, with a recommendation on which types of business would be most or least appropriate for each option. Sole Proprietorship Sole proprietorships are great if you have no liability problems and no employees. Without question, the easiest, lowest-costing entity to run and manage is a sole proprietorship. Advantages of a Sole Proprietorship 1. Simplicity. This is by far the least complicated form of business entity around. In fact, a sole proprietorship is defined by its lack of organization. There’s only one owner. If you have no employees, there are no Internal Revenue Service (IRS) forms to file other than Schedule C with your federal Form 1040 tax return. You simply hang out a sign saying your business name, such as “Harriet Stowe, writer.” Although it’s highly recommended that you have separate bank accounts, you don’t need to do so. You can have one account for you and your business. It doesn’t get any easier than this! 2. Low startup costs. The startup costs are negligible. If you have no employees, there are no filings with the federal government, no organization documents, as with a corporation or a partnership, and no state filings unless you want to reserve a name or operate as an alias. 3. Simple control. You’re in direct control all the time. There’s no hassle with other owners or partners and only one layer of management—you. 4. Freely sellable. Sole proprietorships are easy to sell. There aren’t a lot of hidden traps, as with corporations. 5. Great small-business tax benefits. You get lots of tax benefits being in business. However, there are limitations that apply to partnerships and S corporations that don’t apply to sole proprietorships. For example, you can hire your spouse and deduct all your medical expenses with a self-insured medical reimbursement plan. 6. Carryover and carryback of losses. If you have a loss arising from your sole proprietorship, you can use that loss against any other type of income. In addition, any losses that exceed this year’s income can be used against any earnings this year. If losses exceed your currently years earnings from any source, you can carry over those losses to future years forever against up to 80 percent of future taxable income. Not bad! 7. You are eligible for the 20 percent pass-through deduction that allows you to be taxed effectively on only 80 percent of your net income.In short, this entity is cheap and simple. Disadvantages of a Sole Proprietorship 1. Unlimited liability. Did you know that there are roughly 90 million lawsuits yearly?1 This is certainly the $64,000 question to being a sole proprietorship. You have unlimited liability. Thus, if you are sued for any business problem or incur any debts, you’re personally liable. To be sure, you can get insurance to help offset most of the potential problems, but there are a number of bankrupt people whose economic lives lie in ruin because of unlimited liability or because they didn’t cover every eventuality. If there’s any chance that someone will sue your business, if you have any employees who are not immediate family, or if you have substantial assets (property) that you need to protect, you absolutely should not operate as a sole proprietorship. Pick either one of the corporate forms or become a limited-liability corporation (to be discussed below). If you have employees, you shouldn’t be a sole proprietor. Employees who aren’t your immediate family are walking lawsuits. The reason is that employers are liable for the acts of their employees. In addition, there are numerous lawsuits filed by employees over allegations of discrimination, violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), and so forth. Thus the bottom line is that if you have nonfamily employees, don’t be a sole proprietor. Use another business entity. Whether you operate as a sole proprietorship or as a limited-liability coporation (LLC), get a liability umbrella policy for at least $2 million in addition to your regular business insurance. The cost is negligible, around $500 per year for each million of coverage. I would recommend a liability umbrella of at least $5 million to be safe! 2. No checks and balances. Because a sole proprietorship has only one owner by definition, there is no board of directors or other partners who can oversee what the owner is doing. There’s no one to say, “This is inappropriate or shouldn’t be done.” 3. Trouble raising capital. It’s much tougher to raise capital as a sole proprietor. Basically, the assets of the owner are the primary collateral. 4. No continuity of life. If the owner dies, becomes disabled, or retires, there’s usually no one who can take over the business. The business thus either dies or is sold for a very low price. Because of this problem, I strongly urge all sole proprietorships to have very good disability insurance and good life insurance. Thus, if the owner dies or becomes disabled, there’s a continued cash flow. Who Should Operate as a Sole Proprietorship? Despite the wonderful simplicity of this entity, the unlimited liabilities involved should negate most reasons for operating as a sole proprietor. The only people who should consider operating under a sole proprietorship are those who have almost no chance of liability problems, no nonfamily employees, and little in the way of investments that need protection. Many home-based business people, especially network marketing home-based businesses, should consider this form of operation. If you’re a freelance writer with no employees, thisform of business also could be for you. However, if you feel or your lawyer feels that there is any significant liability exposure, take my advice: Don’t be a sole proprietor. Real estate has large amounts of liability exposure. Thus, do NOT own investment real estate in your own name; use an LLC. While sole proprietorships can benefit from the 20 percent passthrough deduction, there is an income limit. The deduction is generally limited to 50 percent of wages (or 2.5 percent of assets) or the pass-through deduction, whichever is lesser IF your taxable income is over $170,050 (single) or $340,100 (married). This means that if you make over these limits and are self-employed with no employees, the pass-through deduction could start phasing out. However, operating as an S corporation means wages will be produced, which should allow for all or most of the passthrough deduction regardless of your income. General Partnership A partnership is essentially like a sole proprietorship but with two or more partners/ owners. However, there are some advantages and disadvantages to the partnership that a sole proprietorship doesn’t offer. There are two kinds of partnerships: general and limited. Let’s discuss the general partnership first. Advantages of a General Partnership 1. Broader expertise. A sole proprietor is a one-man or one-woman shop. He or she must become a “jack of many trades”—good at management, marketing, accounting, liability protection, taxes, and much more—to become successful. With a partnership, several people can divide the work and share and develop expertise. Thus one partner can do the marketing, while another can manage the inside operation. This can result in more efficiency and can attract greater knowledge to the operation. 2. Easier to raise capital. With a partnership, you can bring in as many investor/ owner partners as you want: There’s no legal limit. If you need to get a loan, you have more collateral at risk for a loan because more parties are involved. Thus a partnership can attract a lot more capital than a proprietorship. 3. Easy to form. Most partnerships are very easy to form. You just need to draft up a partnership agreement showing the rights and obligations of the partners. There are very few filings with either the IRS or the states unless you have employees, although it’s more complicated than for a sole proprietorship—but then, every entity is more complicated than a sole proprietorship. 4. Low startup costs. As with proprietorships, the costs are low. Since there are few required filings with either the states or the federal government, formation costs are low. You will, however, need a partnership agreement, as noted earlier, which adds to your costs. In addition, a partnership needs to file a separate IRS form (Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership Income). Thus, the cost of filing a return is greater than for a sole proprietorship.5. General partnerships can benefit from the 20 percent pass-through deduction that potentially results in paying tax on up to 80 percent of your net income. 6. No double taxation. All profits and losses flow through to the partners. There’s no double tax, as there is with regular corporations. Any losses are limited to your partnership basis. However, that basis includes what you paid for your partnership interest, the basis of any other property contributed, plus your share of the liabilitieThus you should have sufficient basis for the losses. Example: Sam contributes $10,000 in cash, plus stock worth $20,000 for which he paid $15,000, to get a 50 percent partnership interest. In addition, the partnership gets a bank loan for $40,000. Sam’s basis in the partnership is $45,000:Cash: Stock (basis): Prorated share of debt (50 percent): Total basis: $10,000 $15,000 $20,000 $45,000With partnerships, you always have to worry about your basis because losses are limited to the basis. With sole proprietorships, you don’t have this problem. With these increased benefits, you would think that everyone should run out, find some good partners, and form a partnership instead of being a sole proprietorship. However, there are some major drawbacks to partnerships. Disadvantages of a General Partnership 1. Lack of continuity. Generally, partnerships terminate on the death, retirement, withdrawal, or resignation of a partner. The IRS notes that if a 50 percent partner dies, retires, resigns, or withdraws; a partnership terminates for tax purposes regardless of what happens under state law. This one problem can be overcome easily with a well-drafted partnership agreement that notes, “The death, disability, resignation, or withdrawal of a partner will not terminate the partnership.” 2. More management. With more owners comes more management, more layers of management. Partnerships thus can’t respond as quickly to changes as a sole proprietorship. 3. Complaints about money and draws. There are usually major fights among partners about how much money should be distributed to each partner based on the production or efforts involved. More partnerships have terminated because of this one factor, in my opinion, than for any other reason. With a proprietorship, you don’t have this problem—unless you like to fight with yourself. 4. Unlimited liability. This is probably the greatest drawback of all. Like sole proprietors, you’re unlimitedly liable for all partnership debts unless they are specifically nonrecourse debts (which means that you have not guaranteed the debt personally). If this isn’t badenough, you’re also unlimitedly liable for the actions of your partners. They can, in effect, bind you and make you liable for a host of obligations. Yuck! 5. Good luck finding the right partners. Having a separation of duties and finding people who specialize in different aspects of the business sounds wonderful in theory. In practice, however, it’s very hard to do. Many partnerships break up because one partner isn’t pulling his or her weight or is failing at some important designated task. 6. Fewer fringe benefits available. Partnerships have fewer fringe benefits than regular corporations. Moreover, the benefits derived from a self-insured medical plan are more limited for both partners and for owners of more than 2 percent of the stock of an S corporation. Partners and more than 2 percent stockholders of S corporations can set up a self-insured medical plan solely for routine physicals and laboratory testing. 7. Can avoid tax on 20% of your modified net income. You are eligible for the 20 percent pass-through deduction that allows you to be taxed effectively on only 80 percent of your net income. Who Should Operate as a General Partnership? Take my advice: Before you decide on being a partnership, take three aspirins and lie down until the desire passes. You should never, ever form a general partnership. Why not? From practical experience, I’ve seen too many partnerships break up because of fights among the partners about money, power, ego, who is failing to contribute, etc. It’s just horrible. If you think that divorces aren’t fun, you should see what happens in court with partnership splits. It’s very nasty. In addition, being unlimitedly liable for the acts of your partners and for their malpractice could be a disaster, as will be shown with the Arthur Andersen Company. Take my advice: Don’t form a general partnership. In the event that you don’t listen to me, at least have a buy/sell agreement with any partners. This agreement provides that if there is a death, disability, or unsolvable disagreement among the partners, you have a way to buy out a partner using a fixed formula. Partnership Startup Checklist In addition to all the items just noted, if you have a partnership, you should have a good partnership agreement that notes the following:The term of the partnershipHow new partners may or may not be addedProvisions in the event of the total disability, death, withdrawal, or retirement of a partnerProvisions on the timing of any profit-sharing distributions and how they are to be determinedListing of the initial contributions of the partners and how any excess contributionis to be allocated List of all duties, work hours, and profit sharingProvisions for management and for handling disputesProvisions that no person can be a partner unless approved by a percentage of the remaining partners (to prevent creditors from being partners) Limited Partnership Because of all the partnership drawbacks, many people set up limited partnerships, which usually are formed for investments. These are formed with one or two limited partners and one general partner who is liable for all debts. This is not normally a problem because the general partner usually is a corporation with limited liability. Advantages of a Limited Partnership 1. Limited liability. Unlike a general partnership, the limited partners are only responsible for their initial contributions, unless they personally guarantee any debts. They are thus insulated from all partnership liabilities, like a corporation. The general partner is unlimitedly liable, but since general partners usually are corporations, their liability is limited, too. The limited partners enjoy limited liability, but only if they do not in any way participate in management. If they’re active in management, courts have held that they are the alter ego of the partnership, which causes the limited partners to be unlimitedly liable as a general partner. Thus, if you are a limited partner, you should only contribute capital and not in any way help out the partnership or make any management decisions other than voting for another general partner. 2. Great way to raise capital. Since there can be no limit to the number of limited partners, this form of entity can raise a lot of capital. This is one of the big reasons for using limited partnerships for investment. 3. Centralized management. By definition, limited partners only contribute capital and do not participate in management. There usually is a centralized management structure that handles all the business of the partnership. 4. Transferability. Although most partnership agreements require some sort of partnership consent before transferring any partnership interest, it’s usually not a problem getting consent in the sale or transfer of a limited partnership interest. 5. Continuous life. Unlike general partnerships, most limited partnerships don’t terminate on the death or disability of a limited partner. If the general partner becomes bankrupt, this could be a problem unless the partnership agreement allows the limited partners to get a new general partner. 6. Estate planning discounts. Because limited partnerships are not readily sellable and have very little voting power, their value is usually discounted for estate tax purposes. This is the reason why many estate planners are recommending the use of family limited partnerships for estate planning purposes. 7. Flowthrough of income. Partnerships do not pay tax. All income and losses flow through to the partners, usually in accordance with their contributions. Family limited partnerships are great ways to shift income to family members. 8. Limited partnerships can benefit from the 20 percent pass-through deduction that potentially results in paying tax on up to 80 percent of your net income. Disadvantages of a Limited Partnership 1. Limited transferability. There usually isn’t a market for a partnership interest, so it’s hard to sell. Moreover, the consent of the general partners usually is required for any sale. 2. Heavy costs. It’s usually costly to set up a limited partnership because of the complexity of the partnership agreement needed and the requirement to file a Form 1065 plus K-1s for each partner at year end noting their share of partnership income and losses. In addition, since management is centralized, it must be paid, which raises the yearly costs considerably. 3. No control over the general partners. The general partner controls the dayto-day activities of the partnership. So who’s overseeing the general partner? Who’s on the alert for any embezzlement? Sadly, the answer is that you have an outside accountant doing the books (hopefully); however, there has been a lot of improper behavior by general partners who have taken more money than normally would have been allowed. 4. The limited partners may not participate in management. This has its good and bad points, but the limited partners must not participate in management or they’ll lose their protected status as limited partners. If the general partner is running the business improperly (but not doing anything illegal), the limited partners will have very little say. 5. Passive loss problems. All limited partnerships are treated as passive activitieThis means that if there are losses, you can use them only to the extent that you have passive income. Passive income includes income that’s not earned, such as rents, royalties, or other partnership income. Thus, if you want to use the losses, you must have some passive income for the losses to offset. If you don’t have passive income, the losses get carried over to future years. Thus, as an investor, you should have some positive passive income. Who Should Operate as a Limited Partnership? As you can see, limited partnerships are very useful. They should be used mainly for investors who will not be active in the business. Real estate limited partnershipsare an ideal example because all the depreciation and losses from the real estate pass through to the partners. In addition, family limited partnerships can be set up to shift income and to allow a big estate tax discount for the partnership interest. Consult a good estate planning attorney about this. Corporations The word incorporate means “to create a separate body.” This is exactly what defines a corporation. It’s a separate entity that, on its own behalf, can sue, borrow money, be responsible for its own debts, and run a business on its own behalf. Many entrepreneurs who are the sole owners of their corporations do not understand that they are not the business; the business is the corporation. Advantages of a Regular Corporation (C Corporation) 1. Limited liability. Perhaps the greatest reason to set up a corporation is not taxes but liabilities. If a corporation is set up properly, and if the owners adhere to the corporate formalities, it can limit most liabilities to the assets of the corporation. The only exceptions are fraud, malpractice, and failure to adhere to the corporate formalities. Malpractice is a real problem for some small businesses today. The advantage of corporate status is that unlike in a general partnership, if a co-owner of a corporation commits malpractice, you would not be liable personally for it. Only the co-owner who committed the malpractice normally would become unlimitedly liable, and only the assets of the corporation are exposed. Example: Doctors Alice, Bob, and Charley form a professional corporation. Alice commits malpractice. Alice is unlimitedly liable to the injured person, as is the corporation. However, Bob and Charley are not personally liable; the corporation has insulated them from liability. 2. Specialized management. Corporations can have as many officers as they can afford. Thus, unlike a sole proprietor, they can and usually do have different people handling different aspects of the business. In a sense, they get the same advantages in this way as a general partnership. 3. Regular corporations (C corporations) pay a flat rate tax of 21 percent. 4. Great tax advantages. Regular corporations (C corporations) and employees of S corporations who own less than 2 percent of the stock get the most fringe benefits among all the entities.here are some examples: 100 percent deduction for health insurance premiums for the officers and their families—a benefit that is also available to sole proprietors and partners100 percent deduction for disability insurance premiums100 percent deduction for medical expenses that are not covered by insurance,using a self-insured medical reimbursement planQualified stock options that can give capital gainsTax-free life insurance—up to $50,000 of group term lifeA fully deductible athletic facility and athletic equipment, if on the premises of the businessA cafeteria plan that can cover day care, unreimbursed medical expenses (with some limits), adoption assistance, and group legal serviceTax-free supper money allowanceQualified pensions and profit sharing that allow borrowing 5. Accumulation of capital. Unlike other types of entities, corporations are subject to their own set of tax rates. For good reasons, corporations can accrue $50,000 of net earnings each year and get taxed only in the 15 percent tax bracket. Thus, if you need to accumulate capital for marketing, business expansion, or inventories, this can be a major benefit. 6. Transferability of ownership. Unlike with a partnership or even a limited partnership, you usually can transfer your stock holding without consent from the corporation or other stockholders if you have a buyer. 7. Great for a public offering. If you want to go public and raise capital, no entity is better than a regular corporation. We have exchanges that handle the raising of capital and the transferability of shares. There’s rarely a problem with disposing of publicly traded stock. 8. Ordinary losses on sale of stock. Normally, when you sell a stock at a loss, your loss is limited to any capital gains; if it exceeds any gains, you may deduct up to $3,000 of the loss against other income. Losses in excess of this amount can be carried forward and used to reduce future capital gains, up to $3,000 per year. Example: Wendy has a stock loss of $20,000. If she made $5,000 with some stock gains, she may use $5,000 of the loss against the gains and may use another $3,000 of the loss against her salary or other income. She carries over the remaining loss to future years to use in the same way. If you plan correctly when the corporation is formed, when you sell corporate stock at a loss, it’s an ordinary loss. This means that you would not be limited to offsetting any capital gains, and there wouldn’t be a limit of $3,000 per year. In fact, the maximum amount of ordinary loss that you can take would be $50,000 if you are single8 and up to a whopping $100,000 if you are married and file a joint return!9 Yeah! However, you must organize your corporation so that the stock you receive is deemed “Section 1244 stock.” 9. Eliminate up to 100 percent of your gain when you sell your stock in your corporation. Yes, you read this correctly. If you are set up as a regular C corporation, you will probably qualify for a little-known but very available exemption allowed under the American Taxpayer Relief Law, the small-business stock. Exemption. Thus, if you own a business and are selling your stock in that business, you might be able to avoid 100 percent on that gain if your stock qualifies as qualified small-business stock (QSBS). In order for you to qualify, you need to meet all of the following rules:You must be an individual who owns the stock. Thus, this benefit doesn’t apply to corporate owners of stock.The stock was acquired after September 27, 2010, for cash, property, or services.You must have hold the stock for more than five years.As to the corporation, a qualified small business means any domestic sea corporation in which the aggregate gross assets of the corporation (or any predecessor of it) did not exceed $50,000,000: (a) after stock was issued (b) gain exclusion was capped at lower of $10,000,000 or 10 times basiNote: This exclusion amount has changed over the years and there are other rules not mentioned. Thus, you need to check with a good tax professional about this. Disadvantages of a Regular Corporation Despite all the wonderful benefits that are available to regular corporations, there are some major drawbacks. Don’t you wish that there could be just one entity that has all positives and no negatives? Unfortunately, this doesn’t exist. If you’re considering forming a Nevada corporation, I recommend getting advice from Nevada Corporate Planners at www.nvinc.com. 1. Double taxation. Since regular corporations are treated as separate entities and have their own tax rates, you can have the possibility of double taxation: tax at the corporate level and tax for you at your rates if there’s a dividend. As bad as this sounds—and it can be bad—most people who operate as regular corporations plan before year’s end to pay enough in bonuses and salaries to eliminate most of the double-tax problem. However, it takes planning, and of course, this increases the cost involved. Before I became an S corporation, I would meet with my accountant before year’s end and make projections of my yearly income and pay bonuses according to my projections. 2. Increased paperwork. Without question, operating a regular corporation is a “threeTylenol” hassle. You must have yearly stockholder meetings to elect a board of directors, even if you’re the only stockholder, and yearly board meetings to elect officers and approve major issues within the corporation. Also, you must keep corporate minutes. You need separate bank accounts and very good books and records. If you do not do this, your corporation will be deemed your “alter ego,” and you may become liable for all corporate debts and obligations. 3. Added paperwork costs. Clearly, corporations are more expensive to operate than any other entity. You have to file a separate corporate tax return with schedules (Form 1120). In addition, you will be the employee of the corporation, so you must file with both the federal government and the state government for an Employer Identification Number (SS-4 and SS-5. Form SS-5 is Application for a Social Security Card), as well as for unemployment. Some states, such as California, have special corporate taxes that don’t apply to proprietorships, which significantly increase the costs. 4. Losses don’t flow through to you as stockholder. Unlike with partnerships and proprietorships, all losses in the corporation stay with the corporation. They don’t flow through to you on your corporate tax return because corporations are separate entities. This disadvantage can be somewhat overcome, however, by electing S corporation status, which will be discussed below. The losses in a regular corporation get carried over to future years in the corporation and offset future corporate profits. 5. Lots of tax traps. Corporations have traps set up by the government to overcome perceived abuses, such as operating a corporation with a lot of unearned income (personal holding company) and accumulating too much in earnings (accumulated earnings tax). 6. Stockholder fights. Corporations are run and managed somewhat like a democracy. The ones who get the most votes (based on shares) elect the board of directors, which, in turn, elects the management. Sadly, many corporate owners end up fighting over management, trying to fire each other, trying to benefit one owner over the others, etc. It becomes just as bad as fights among partners. This is especially fierce if each owner owns 50 percent of the stock. It’s vital to have in place some sort of buy/sell agreement that provides both a formula and a mechanism for buying out stockholders. A good lawyer can draft one, and, I promise, it will be one of the best things that you’ll ever do. Don’t pass up this precaution, as many have done, to their regret. Many years ago, I had a corporation with a 50 percent partner but didn’t have a buy/sell agreement. It took hundreds of thousands of dollars in legal fees, not to mention a huge amount of hard feelings, to settle this situation. Who Should Operate as a Regular Corporation and Who Shouldn’t The people who should consider being a regular corporation are those who have some liability exposure that they want to protect themselves from and who are in any of the following situations:They have substantial inventories and need to accumulate capital for this purpose.They need to accumulate capital in the future for marketing and other projects. They expect to go public in the near future.They need all the fringe benefits such as health insurance.Those that are specific service businesses that don’t qualify for the 20 percent pass-through deduction due to having too much taxable income. As I said before and want to restate because it’s important, the main purpose of operating as any form of corporation is to limit liability exposure or perhaps to go public. If you don’t have any significant liability exposure and don’t plan on having a public offering in the near future, being a corporation—especially a regular corporation—is probably not advantageous. From my experience, I have found that most people, despite having the best of intentions, do not keep up with the corporate formalities, annual board meetings, minutes, etc. It just doesn’t happen. If you’re the kind of person who won’t strictly adhere to these formalities every year, do not form a corporation. Did I say that clearly enough? Form one of the other entities, such as a limited-liability corporation, which will be discussed later on. S Corporation There are a lot of problems inherent to regular corporations. Congress allows taxpayers to avoid most of these without many negative side effects. You do this by electing S corporation status. An S corporation is a corporation. To the surprise of many people, it has the exact same formalities as a regular corporation—stockholder meetings and board of directors meetings, etc. In addition, you must make an election by filing Form 2553 with the IRS within the first 75 days of the tax year if you want to operate as an S corporation for the year. An election is just that: It’s a formal choice to become an S corporation. If you don’t make this formal choice, you are treated as a regular corporation. However, there are a number of advantages that an S corporation has over a regular corporation. Advantages of an S Corporation 1. No double taxatioWith regular corporations, you would take the gross income of the corporation, subtract any business expenses, and pay tax at the corporate level on the net income. With an S corporation, this is not the case. Unless you were a regular corporation and then elected to become an S corporation,13 there’s generally no double taxation because all the income and losses flow through to you as the stockholder. S corporations thus are treated like partnerships in this way. You actually would receive a form (K-1) noting your share of the net income. Thus you don’t have to go through all the complicated year-end tax planning to eliminate the double-tax problem as with regular corporations. 2. Elimination of up to 50 percent of your Social Security and Medicare taxes. As I mentioned, the main reason for setting up a corporation is to limit your liability exposure. However, there’s one major tax benefit to S corporations that can be so great that many accountants have recommended setting up an S corporation solely for this benefit: the substantial saving in Social Security and Medicare taxes with the use of S corporation dividendThis is especially true if you make under the Social Security maximum ($47,000 in 2022). Also, if you can benefit from the 20 percent pass-through deduction, you should consider forming an S corporation over that of an LLC or sole proprietorship if your taxable income is over $170,050 ( single) and over $340.100 ( married). By paying yourself a salary, you could avoid the limitation based on 50 percent of salaries. This benefit can be so substantial. 3. Income splitting. You’re better off having various family members being taxed on shares of your income than one person—you—being taxed on the whole thing. This is so because our tax system is a graduated rate system: The rates rise as income rises. By splitting income among family members who don’t have a lot of other income, the lower rates allow you to save a bundle. The rich have known this for years and have planned accordingly. An S corporation can allow you the same benefit. You can give some stock to your children or grandchildren or to anyone in a lower tax bracket than you whom you want to support. When the company earns money, they are taxed on their share of the net income based on their stock ownership. Let me give you a true example that happened to one of my friends. Example: John and Martha have three children. They have a sole proprietorship business that had net earnings of $112,850; they paid in federal income tax alone (not counting Social Security) $24,265. I suggested that they form an S corporation and give 15 percent of the stock to each of their three children, who were attending college. Each child then was taxed on 15 percent of the gain, and the parents paid tax on 55 percent of the gain. Each child paid $2,239 in taxes, and the parents paid $10,554. The savings was $6,994 with this technique, computed as follows:Tax payable by parents as sole proprietorship: Tax payable by all three children: Tax payable by parents using split technique: Total taxes paid by family: Net savings to the family using split technique: $24,265 $ 6,717 $10,554 $17,271 $ 6,994No wonder the rich have used income splitting for years. Now that you know about it, you can do the same thing. The rich, however, have paid a lot of money in fees to find out about this; you have only paid for this book. What a deal! 4. Specialized management. Just like regular corporations, S corporations have centralized management. You have a board of directors to help oversee what you’re doing and provide, in theory, some checks and balances.5. Limited liability. S corporations limit liability to the same extent as regular corporations, no better and no worse. 6. Ordinary loss on the sale of stock. Just as with a regular corporation, you can have an ordinary loss on the sale of your stock, up to $50,000 if you’re single and up to $100,000 if you’re married. (See the earlier discussion dealing with regular corporation) 7. Use of corporate losses. As I mentioned, an S corporation flows all income and losses to the owners. Thus, if you have a loss, the loss passes through to your individual tax return, just as with a sole proprietorship. However, there’s an IRS “gotcha.” The loss is limited to the basis in your stocThat basis is what you paid for your stock in money plus the basis of any property contributed to the S corporation for the stock. It also includes any income that you were taxed on but didn’t receive. You subtract what you received as a dividend. Thus, the formula for basis is: Cash paid for stock plus Basis (which is usually the cost) of property contributed for stock plus Income that was taxed to you in the past that you didn’t receive minus Any dividends received or losses that were passed through to you. Limiting your losses to your stock basis is very different from the treatment of losses in sole proprietorships, in which you can take any losses on your individual tax return. This means that you must do some planning if you expect a loss in your S corporation to ensure that you have sufficient basis for the loss. 8. Limited benefits from self-insured medical plan. As I noted earlier, owners of more than 2 percent of the corporate stock and partners generally can’t benefit from a self-insured medical plan except to cover routine physicals and laboratory testing. With all these wonderful benefits, you would think that an S corporation might be the way to go for most people. In fact, it’s probably the preferred vehicle for most small businesses; however, there are some drawbacks to being an S corporation. With an S corporation, a self-insured medical plan is limited to routine physicals and diagnostic testing for the owners, so you might want to consider an HSA, health savings account. (HSAs can be used only in conjunction with applicable high-deductible medical plans.) 9. 50 to 100 percent exclusion on gain from Qualified Small Business Stock (QSBS).17 A big benefit to being incorporated is that noncorporate taxpayers can avoid between 50 to 100 percent of the gain from the sale of your stock depending on when you got your stock. Yes, you read this correctly. Generally QSBS held for more than five years can exclude:100 percent of gross income from sale of the stock if the stock was acquired after September 27, 2010 10. Pass through deduction: S corporations are allowed to exclude up to 20% of their modified net income from tax.  “Highlight of Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.” Sadly, Congress can’t make anything simple or straightforward. The gain may not exceed the greater of $10 million or 10 times your adjusted basis in the stock. To qualify for this special exclusion of gain, the underling company must be a “Qualified Small Business.” This means that it will meet the following rules:At the date of issuance of the stock, it must be a domestic corporation whose assets did not exceed $50 million.During substantially all of taxpayer’s holding period, the corporation was a C corporation that conducted an active business and not just a holding company and not a DISC, a REIT, REMIC, or cooperative. Check with your accountant or lawyer about meeting these rules when you start up your entity or to see if you qualify. Disadvantages of an S Corporation 1. Severe limits on qualifying for S corporation status. There are several tests that you must meet to operate as a qualified S corporation:You must have fewer than 100 stockholderThis is a strict limitation. If you exceed this number, you’re disqualified. However, a husband and a wife count as one stockholdeThe limitation isn’t too bad unless you have a large number of owners or investors. This one limitation is the reason why no public corporation is an S corporation.The corporation must be a domestic corporation formed in the United StateIt can’t be a foreign corporation.It can’t be an ineligible corporation, such as a banFor most small businesses, this is not a problem.Only individuals, estates, and a certain type of limited trust can be stockholderAnother corporation, partnership, and most trusts can’t own any stock in an S corporation. (Yuck!)All stock must be owned by a U.S. citizen or a U.S. residenThus, if you have foreign investors, you can’t be an S corporation. In addition, corporations, partnerships, and LLCs that are treated as partnerships can’t own S corporation stock. This definitely does limit your options.You can have only one class of stocThis has a number of drawbacks. First, this limits the estate planning benefits that you can do with multiple classes of stock because you can’t have more than one class with an S corporation. Second, if you want to give out preferred stock that doesn’t vote but is preferred in some way, you are prohibited from doing this. This limitation on shareholders and on not having different classes of stock provides less protection for the stock from creditors. Creditors can become stockholders with voting rights. LLCs have a real advantage here in that you can limit who becomes a member. You might be thinking that you would qualify for S corporation status and then, after you get qualified, violate the rules. This doesn’t work. If you violate any of these six requirements, your S corporation status terminates on the first day of the violation. 2. Complete flowthrough of earnings. You can’t accumulate capital at lower corporate rates as you can with a regular corporation because all income is taxed to you whether or not you receive it and it is taxed at your normal tax rates. 3. Limited ability to raise capital. Generally, because of the limits, the financing is done by the shareholders and is based on whatever assets they contribute. 4. Corporate debts don’t increase your stock basis. With most partnerships, the partnership debt increases your basis. This is not true of an S corporation. If the corporation takes on any debt, this does not increase the basis of the stock for the stockholders. This one point makes S corporations very different from partnerships. 5. More limited fringe benefits than in regular corporations. S corporations allow fewer fringe benefits. For example, the owners don’t get any major benefit from setting up a medical reimbursement plan such as a regular corporation can do and even a sole proprietorship can do by hiring a spouse. They get some fringe benefits, but fewer than with regular corporations. S corporations get the same benefit as regular corporations in deducting all health insurance premiums and most home healthcare premiums for officers and their families. The deduction is 100 percent of the premium for medical insurance that is not subsidized by an employer. However, this is deducted above the line on personal returns for S corporations. 6. Same bookkeeping hassles of regular corporations. As I said, S corporations are corporations. The S status is only to elect to have all income and losses pass through to you as the owners/stockholders. Thus you must have yearly board of directors meetings, stockholder meetings, corporate minutes, and a separate corporate bank account. Who Should Operate as an S Corporation? An S corporation is ideal in the following situations:Officers/stockholders are earning more than $170,050 of taxable income (single or head of household) or over $340,100 and married.There’s no need for any capital accumulated for inventories or marketing.All financing will be shareholder financing.You meet all the rules.Limited-Liability Corporation (LLC) For many years, Europe and South America have allowed a type of hybrid entity, a limitedliability corporation (LLC). For you history buffs, the LLC started in this country in 1977 in Wyoming but has been accepted gradually by all the other states. Essentially, an LLC is a cross between a limited partnership and a corporation. If there’s only one owner, it’s deemed a sole proprietorship for tax purposes, and you file the normal IRS Schedule C with your federal tax return. If there’s more than one owner, you file for tax purposes as a partnership and file Form 1065, which is a bit more costly. Regardless of how you file, LLC status protects you from liabilities in the same way as corporation status. Advantages of an LLC 1. Limited liability. As with a corporation or a limited partnership, the LLC limits liability for debts and obligations. The only time you would be personally liable is if you personally guarantee the debt, the LLC commits fraud, or you commit malpractice. Also, as with a corporation, you’re responsible for your own negligence and for the negligence of those whom you supervise directly, but not for the negligence of other LLC members. The bottom line is that the LLC is an easier way to get the same protection offered by a corporation without a lot of the legal formalities and administrative details of a corporation. Since your liability is limited to the amount of money or other capital you contribute to the LLC, you have the same protection against obligations and lawsuits as with regular corporations and S corporations. 2. None of the restrictions of an S corporation. You can have any number of members; they can be stockholders, whether corporate or otherwise; and you can have foreign investors. Thus the LLC gives tremendous flexibility while maintaining limited liability. 3. All losses and income pass through to stockholders. Since one-owner LLCs are treated as sole proprietorships and LLCs with two or more owners are treated as partnerships, all income and losses flow through to the members. There is no double tax. LLCs thus are beneficial for operating a business as well as for holding real estate. You also get the carryback and carryforward of net operating losses on your individual return as you would with a sole proprietorship as long as you are a one-owner LLC. Two or more owner LLCs come under the partnership rules unless you elected to be treated as a corporation, in which case the corporate rules would apply. 4. LLCs get higher basis with LLC debts. As with a partnership, if the LLC incurs any debt, the debt increases the basis of the members’ portion of the LLC. Thus LLCs get the best of being a partnership without any of the drawbacks.5. Much cheaper to operate and form than corporations. LLCs are inexpensive to form. You simply register your LLC articles with the state, and you’re off and running. Moreover, unlike corporations, you don’t have to have any formal meetings, minutes, or member meetings. 6. Asset protection. An LLC may protect assets better than all the entities. Yes, you read that correctly. An LLC may be better at asset protection than any other entity, even a corporation. If a partner or corporate stockholder gets sued for any reason, the creditor gets the stock or can become an unwanted partner. Partnerships and LLCs can prevent this possibility by providing in the orginal formation documents for the LLC that no new members of LLCs are allowed without the consent of the other members. This will keep creditors from becoming members. A creditor can proceed against a member’s interest in the LLC only by means of a charging order, which provides that any distribution made to the member who is a debtor would instead go to the creditor. This has a detrimental side effect for the creditor. If the LLC has undistributed income, the creditor would be taxed on the member’s share of the undistributed income, just as the debtor-member, even though the creditor didn’t receive the distribution! This makes most creditors leery about placing a charging order on the LLC member’s interest. Think about this for a minute: What creditor would want to put a lien or charging order on a member’s interest if he or she could be taxed on money that he or she never receives? This is why an LLC that’s taxed as a partnership is very beneficial for asset protection. Single-owner LLCs are not as protected because a creditor may be able to take control of the LLC if there’s only one owner. As you can see, an LLC is a really great entity and, in my opinion, the entity of choice for most people. However, despite the attempts of most states to overcome most of the disadvantages of corporations and partnerships with an LLC, there still exist some disadvantages. 7. Same tax advantages as that of a sole proprietorship (if sole owned LLC or of a partnership if two or more owners of an LLC). Thus, you can uses losses from the LLC against your other earnings and can take advanatage of the 20 percent pass-through deductions to reduce the taxable income from net profits. Disadvantages of an LLC 1. No saving on Social Security. With an S corporation, you can save Social Security and Medicare taxes by distributing dividends along with salaries. LLCs do not seem to have this advantage. All earnings are taxed like those of a sole proprietorship or a partnership and are subject to Social Security. This isn’t entirely clear. There’s some argument that if you are an LLC member but have no management authority and do not actively participate in the day-to-day operations, you should be treated as a limited partner and not be subject to Social Security on your share of the earning2. More complicated paperwork. You have to file articles of organization for the LLC with the state in which it is formed. This certainly raises the costs. In addition, some states have a special tax on LLC income. You definitely should check with a good accountant about the state-law implications, which can result in some severe disadvantages for LLCs. 3. Lifetime limits. Some states mandate that LLCs terminate within 30 years or less. This is not true of Nevada, which is a good reason to form an LLC there. In addition, some states require dissolution of an LLC on the death or resignation of a member. This can be overcome by stating in the formation article that a termination won’t occur on the death, disability, or resignation of a member. 4. May require two or more members. Some states require that an LLC have two members or more. In most states, however, this requirement is being changed to accommodate one-member LLCs. A problem arises if you form your LLC in a state that allows one-member LLCs but operate in states that don’t. Your LLC in this situation may not protect you from liabilities! However, the LLC statutes in almost all states contain “nondiscriminatory provisions” that the laws of the state in which an LLC was formed govern its organization, its internal affairs, and the liability of its members. Who Should Operate as an LLC? An LLC is an appropriate entity for the following:Individuals who expect to earn more than the Social Security maximumIndividuals who need liability protection but can’t qualify as an S corporationBusinesses that don’t need to accumulate capital for inventories or for marketingReal estate businesses Overall General Recommendations Obviously, every situation and business is different, but I thought I would give some general rules. 1. If you expect losses when you first start your business or for a short period of time after you start up, you should operate as either a sole proprietorship or LLC. The reason is that if you have losses, you can use those losses on your personal tax return. If you were a corporation, these losses might be trapped in the corporation and only used by the corporation. Once losses are not a problem, you can always change to another entity. If you have a business that has high liability exposure, you want to to the LLC route and NOT operate as a sole proprietorship because of the unlimited liability exposure of sole proprietors. If you are starting up a network marketing business, your liability exposure is small. Thus, starting off as a sole proprietorship is usually best.2. If you want to accrue capital for future marketing, operate as a C corporation: Corporations are taxed at a flat 21 percent rate. However, you will need a good business reason documented in your corporate minutes or you can be hit with an accumulated earnings penalty. See a good accountant or lawyer about this. 3. If you have several owners and want to distribute most or all profits annually, operate as an S Corporation. This usually results in the lowest overall tax because of the 20 percent pass-through deduction. 4. If you expect to operate your business for at least 5+ years and then want to sell out, become a C corporation. C corporations, which qualify as small business corporations, can have a BIG benefit, When the stock is sold, the stockholders can avoid all tax up to $10 million in gain. Yes, they can sell their stock and avoid tax on the first $10 million of gain. However, you have to be in existence for at least five years and have assets of less than $50 million. Also, you can’t qualify for this benefit if you are:A service business in the fields of health, law, engineering, architecture, accounting, actuarial science, performing arts, consulting, athletics, financial services, or brokerage servicesA banking, insurance, financing, leasing, investing, or similar businessA farming businessA business involving the production of products for which percentage depletion can be claimedA business of operating a hotel, motel, restaurant, or similar business 5. If you are a specified service business and make over $440,100 of taxable income (married) or are single and earn over $220,050, you should consider being a C corporation since you won’t be eligible for the 20 percent pass-through deduction. A specified service business is one that is:LegalMedicalActuraryAccountingFinancial servicesConsultingAthleticsPerforming artsAny business whose reputation is the major asset in the business such as possibly realtors 6. If you are NOT operating a specified service business (such as a networking business or franchise), consider operating as either an S corporation or C corporation. This is especially true if you are married and earning over $440,100 or taxable income or over $207,500 of taxable income and single since there are limitations to the 20 percent passthrough deduction based on wages. Being a corporation will allow you to avoid these limits with wages. 7. If you own investment real estate, consider establishing a sole-owner LLC for each property owned. First, this should make you eligible for the 20 percent pass-through deductions. Second, it will allow for losses to pass through to your tax return if there are losses. Finally, real estate ownership carries high liability risks. The LLC wil potentially limit your liability. In choosing the best corporate entity to start your business, it’s crucial to determine what fringe benefits you can obtain and whether business losses can pass through to you.You can always change entities as time and circumstances demand.A sole proprietorship is simple, simple, simple, but liability is unlimited.Don’t operate as a sole proprietorship unless you are sure that you have the following: – No liability exposure – No significant business assets – No nonfamily employeesIf you even desire to form a general partnership, take three aspirin and lie down until the desire passes. In the event that your business is already a general partnership, get a buy/sell agreement immediately. “Don’t pass go” until you do.Limited partnerships are great vehicles for obtaining investors without being subject to liability risks. They’re great for investments such as real estate.Operate as a regular corporation only if – You intend to register on a national exchange soon (go public). – You need to accumulate capital for inventories or for mass marketing and can use the lower corporate tax rates to do so. – You will solemnly swear to adhere to all corporate formalities of corporate minutes, directors meetings, and stockholder meetings.If there are only a few corporate owners, get a buy/sell agreement as soon as possible. You’ll thank me in the morning.Form an S corporation if you are NOT a specified service business and have taxable incomes over $340,100 married or $170,050 single.Form an S Corporation or even a regularly corporation if you are a specified service business and: – You make over $170,050 (single) or $340,100 (married) or – You have some liability exposure or nonfamily employees. – You meet all the S corporation rules.To be a qualified S corporation: – You must have fewer than 100 stockholders. – It must be a domestic corporation only. – There must be only one class of stock. – There must be only individual owners and some limited trusts and estates. – All investors must be citizens or residents of the United States. No foreign investors allowed. Sorry!S corporations are corporations. You have the same formalities as a regular corporation. If you won’t strictly adhere to them, don’t operate as any form of corporation.When forming any corporation, make sure that you qualify for Section 1244, which enables you to take your stock losses as ordinary losses and not as capital losses on your tax return.When forming any corporation, don’t forget that you may be able to avoid between 50 and 100 percent of the gain on the sale of your corporate stock if it’s qualified small-business stock, depending on when you acquired your stock.Limited-liability corporations don’t have formalities, and they protect against liabilities as well as corporations. Form an LLC when – You will have some liability exposure or have substantial assets in the business. – You can’t qualify as an S corporation. – You don’t need to accumulate capital for inventories.If you have a few owners in a corporation, partnership, or LLC, definitely have your lawyer draft a buy/sell agreement that outlines the formula and mechanism and establishes a price to buy out a partner/co-owner. This is crucial—and you will thank your lucky stars that this book prompted you to do so. There are two major myths about incorporating in Nevada that I encounter all the time: Myth 1: Incorporating in Nevada will result in lower costs. Nothing could be further from the truth. In fact, it’s usually cheaper to incorporate in your home state. The reason is that Nevada has a number of fees that many states don’t have, and although Nevada has no corporate income tax, you usually have to file a corporate tax return in the states where you’re doing business as a nonresident. Thus you won’t save money. Myth 2: Incorporating in Nevada will result in lower taxes. This may be the most widespread myth of all. The truth is that incorporating in Nevada will not save any taxes whatsoever. You’ll still have to file in many states as a nonresident.This chapter won’t be long or complicated, but you’ll find the information contained here to be very interesting —IRS auditor .Where do many movie stars form corporations? Where do most con artists form corporations? You may be surprised that these two questions have the same answer—Nevada. In fact, some of the infamous Enron partnerships were located in Nevada or in foreign jurisdictions. We also will examine some of the benefits of incorporating in Nevada rather than in Delawar0The reason that this myth is so pervasive is that some of the more unscrupulous incorporating companies emphasize the extreme privacy that Nevada provides (which will be discussed below) and, in effect, imply that no one will find out. This is not necessarily the case and is not legally correct either. Say it three times: “Incorporating in Nevada will not save you taxes!” Thus, if it doesn’t save taxes or costs, why do it? This is a good question. There are several good reasons to incorporate in Nevada instead of Delaware, which also has some good laws for business. Why the Rich, the Famous, and the Crooked Incorporate in Nevada1 1. Greatest protection from liability. This is easily the number one reason for incorporating in Nevada. There is a well-known legal concept called piercing the corporate veil. This is the process by which a court removes the protection provided to individual members of a corporation and holds these members responsible. Simply put, you’ll become liable for corporate debts and obligations if the veil of your corporation can be pierced. Each state applies different tests for determining whether the court can pierce the corporate veil and hold the shareholders liable. In many states, it’s easier for this to happen than many people realize. In fact—and this may surprise you—here are the top states that allow this, in the order of occurrence:2 California, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Texas, New York, and Pennsylvania. For example, many states require a lot of capitalization (or net assets) for a corporation to be respected and not pierced. In most states, the minimum capitalization is $1,000. In Nevada, it’s $100. In addition, many states will hold you, as owner/officer, liable for corporate debts and obligations if you didn’t adhere to the yearly formalities  concerning stockholder meetings, corporate minutes, and board of directors meetings. Nevada is much more liberal about this and usually won’t pierce the veil and make the owners/officers liable for corporate debts if they haven’t adhered to all the formalities. In a famous Nevada case, Rowland v. Lepire,3 the corporation committed many acts that in most states would have made the stockholders/officers liable for the corporate debts. There was minimal capitalization. There were no formal board of directors or stockholder meetings. No dividends were paid. Officers didn’t receive salaries. No corporate minutes were kept nor was there any evidence that they were ever kept. However, the corporation had a checking account in the corporate name and licenses in the corporate name. The Nevada court held that the corporate veil could not be pierced unless fraud was shown. Despite this great case. However, the case shows how far Nevada will go to protect officers and stockholders of businesses incorporated there. The catch is that the courts won’t allowthis protection if it can be shown that the officers committed fraud or certain other special acts, such as malpractice. Based on the information researched by one of the Nevada incorporating companies,4 Nevada has allowed a piercing of the corporate veil, thus making the stockholders liable for corporate debts, only once in 23 years! If you think about it, this is amazing. 2. Higher degree of privacy. The shareholders’ names are not part of the public recorMany companies actually use nominees as directors so that it’s difficult to find even the names of the directors. In addition, Nevada is less willing than many other states to share information about its corporations with other states and with the federal government. This also ensures a little more privacy. However, if you register in another state to do business, you may have to list the shareholders. Recently, I discussed this issue with various Nevada incorporatorTheir view is that Nevada may share information a little more freely than before owing to the terrorist activities occurring in this country. This would be especially true with the federal government. However, there’s more privacy in Nevada than in other states. 3. No joint and several liability. In many states, if you are found jointly liable for a debt, you could be responsible for the entire debt if it can’t be collected in whole or part from the other debtors. In Nevada, the courts must assign a percentage of responsibility. Every owner found liable is required to pay a share of the judgment no greater than his or her responsibility. Thus, if you and nine others owe $1 million, the courts would have to determine what percentage of the $1 million is your responsibility. You would not be held responsible for the others’ shares if they weren’t collectible. Differences between Nevada and Delaware for Small Corporations You might have heard that Delaware is also a great state for incorporating. Delaware protects stockholders, especially in public corporations, by giving them lots of rights and remedies. For example, Delaware corporate takeover laws are some of the most stringent in the country. However, for small corporations, Nevada has some advantages over Delaware:Nevada protects officers from liability even if they didn’t necessarily act “in good faith.” Delaware has no such provision.Nevada provides greater protection for officers against monetary damages and other types of damages than does Delaware.Nevada protects a director even if there was a breach of his or her duty of loyalty to the corporation. No such protection exists in Delaware.Nevada does not require disclosure of the corporation’s principal business. Delaware has no such privacy provision. Nevada does not require that a corporation disclose any locations or main offices located outside the state. This is not necessarily true in Delaware.Nevada has no corporate income tax. Delaware has an 8.7 percent corporate income tax. The bottom line is that Nevada offers a slightly greater degree of privacy and confidentiality than provided by other states and, more important, offers some of the strongest protection possible from liabilities for stockholders, officers, and directors. Avoidance of Sales Tax Problems and Other Liabilities Some of the thorniest problems for small businesses are the filing of sales tax and income tax returns in many states. The problem is that many states require companies to file a sales tax return and, in many cases, an income tax return if they do any business in that state. Most states have an allocation formula for determining how much income is taxed in the state. You’re allowed to allocate your income to other states based on your assets in each state, the employees in each state, and the income earned in each state. For example, your corporation might earn $100,000 but do very little business in California and have no employees, no office, and no assets in California. Thus the actual tax owed might be only $100, or you might even have a corporate loss. Yet California, like a few other states, assesses a flat tax of $800 for companies that have a lower tax liability. Even worse, if you had to file state sales tax returns in each state, you could be paying more in accounting fees than you would owe in taxes, fees that could add up to tens of thousands of dollars. For a small business with little capital, this cost could be catastrophic. Thus, owing to the cost involved, many small businesses “ignore” filing returns. However, if these states find out that you failed to file the appropriate returns, you could be hit with huge penalties, plus interest, plus the taxes owed. Even worse, your home state usually enforces these obligations and may even prevent you from doing business until these obligations are paid. Thus what can small businesses do? The answer that many of the top accounting firms are recommending is to set up a corporation or limited-liability corporation (LLC) just for the business conducted in the aggressive states, such as California. Then, if a state attacks this entity for not filing or for past-due taxes, all other entities are protected. If you are doing business in various states, I would strongly advise you to contact a major accounting firm that specializes in state tax issues. States have made deals to allow one filing to take care of many problems. Hopefully, the federal government eventually will step in and help to solve this problem for small businesses. You may have read about the many partnerships that Enron set up that led to its collapse. One of the reasons Enron did this was to insulate the liabilities for each entity so that if one entity had problems, they wouldn’t affect the others. In addition, it ensuresgreater privacy: One entity may be uncovered, but not necessarily the other entities. This is one big reason why most Enron partnerships were formed outside the United States. Essentially, this technique is used for a wide variety of potential problems. Incorporating in Nevada will not be less costly or save you taxes.Incorporating in Nevada will provide some of the strongest liability protection of any of the states for officers and directors.Incorporating in Nevada will give you greater privacy than in most other states, unless you register in other states.In many cases, incorporating or forming an LLC in Nevada will avoid a lot of possible joint and several liability problems.As shown with Enron, forming separate entities such as corporations, limited partnerships, and limited-liability corporations will limit the liability problems to that entity and not taint other assets. How to Eliminate up to 40 Percent of Your Social Security and Medicare Tax with an S CorporationIt’s a game. We [tax lawyers] teach the rich how to play it so they can stay rich— and the IRS keeps changing the rules so we can keep getting rich teaching them. I—John Grisham, lawyer and author, The Firm should note that this chapter won’t be long or complicated. In fact, it will probably be one of the shortest in the book. However, don’t let the short length fool you. The tax benefits here alone could make you a millionaire, if you invest the tax savings yearly. Overview of Taxation for S Corporations Unless you converted from a regular corporation to an S corporation,1 an S corporation is not subject to any taYou would compute the corporation’s gross income and subtract any business deductions to arrive at the net taxable income. You would then file an3individual return on your pro rata share of the corporation’s net income or loss. The S corporation would not pay any tax on the income. .Have you ever heard that tax planning is beneficial only to the rich and not to Middle America? Well, this is a myth, as you now know from the previous chapters, which offered information applicable to everyone. However, this chapter is different. It primarily applies to Middle America and not the rich, since it works best for taxpayers who have a net income, after business deductions, of $147,000 or less per person. It is a proven loophole that accountants have been using for decades—using an S corporation to eliminate self-employment tax. 155Example: Mary is a 50 percent shareholder in an S corporation. The corporation had gross sales of $500,000 and deductions of $400,000, for a net income of $100,000. Since Mary owns 50 percent of the stock, she would pay tax on one half of the $100,000, which is $50,000. You pay tax on the net income of the corporation whether or not it’s distributed to you. Thus, if all the income were left in the corporation for growth, Mary would still pay tax on $50,000. This undistributed amount would raise her stock basis, however, as if she had paid $50,000 more for stock. If she receives any dividends, this would reduce the basis. Some income items and deductions get separately stated on your individual return as if you’d earned them. Thus, such income items as tax-exempt income and capital gains and some deductions, such as charitable contributions, would be separately stated on your Form 1040 as if you’d earned these items. The key to saving Social Security taxes is that with an S corporation you pay selfemployment tax on wages, salaries, and bonuses but not on dividendYour share of undistributed earnings is deemed dividends and not wages and is treated as any actual dividend distribution. Let me repeat this again because it is worth repeating: dividends and undistributed earnings are not subject to self-employment tax. Thus, the key is to pay yourself as little in salary as possible and as much in dividends as possible and wipe out most of your Social Security tax. Example: John has a net income of $80,000 from his S corporation. If he receives this amount in the form of salary, all of it would be subject to self-employment tax at the 15.3 percent rate, so he would pay $12,240. If, however, John pays himself a reasonable salary of $40,000 and takes the other $40,000 as a dividend, he would save 15.3 percent on the dividend, a savings of $6,120 each year that he does this! Not bad, huh? You may be thinking that this sounds fabulous. Why not pay zero salary and take all the earnings as dividends and completely eliminate all self-employment tax? Unfortunately, the IRS has thought of thiThe IRS requires you to pay yourself a “reasonable” salary. If you don’t, the entire dividend and undistributed portion of the net income from the S corporation will be reclassified as wages, which are fully subject to self-employment tax. Yuck! In fact, all taxpayers who didn’t understand this rule have ended up losing in court. 7My favorite case involved an attorney named Joseph Radtke. same way. He formed an S corporation and paid himself no salary. He treated the entire net income as a dividend. The tax court rightly reclassified the dividend as wages, and poor Radtke had to pay self-employment tax on the entire amount. Thus, you must pay yourself some reasonable salary. What Is a “Reasonable” Salary? Good question! The IRS defines “reasonable compensation” as what would ordinarily be paid for like services, by like enterprises (similar in size and business to your own), Radtke thought theunder like circumstanceThis is generally interpreted to mean “what you would pay an outside agency or person to do the same duties.” There are a lot of factors that determine what is reasonable, such as:Actual services performedResponsibilities involvedTime spentSize and complexity of the businessPrevailing economic conditionsCompensation paid by comparable firms for comparable servicesSalary paid to company officers in prior years Sadly, as you can see, the factors are not very clear. I would highly recommend that you check with a good accountant or tax attorney when setting any salaries and bonuses for you. Get comparable salaries from government publications. Most people want a nice flat number or a flat percentage of income as the litmus test for reasonable compensation. Sadly, I can’t give a number, because it varies from business to business and according to a number of factors. However, from the many cases that I have read, I have found that in most cases where salary paid was approximately between 40 percent and 60 percent of net income, this amount has been deemed reasonablAlso, if there are unrelated minority stockholders, if they approve some compensation for the officers who are also majority stockholders, courts tend to give weight to this approval from the board of directors or stockholders, since the minority stockholders would then be receiving less in dividendThe bottom line: Check with a good accountant and tax lawyer about setting any salaries and bonuses in order to minimize your salary and minimize your self-employment tax. Here, an ounce of prevention is worth a bundle in wealth! Note: Any net profits left in the S corporation that is NOT distributed as a salary will also qualify for the 20 percent pass-through deductions. See Chapter 20. This strategy is especially great for Middle America.S corporation salaries and bonuses are subject to self-employment tax.Dividends and undistributed earnings (which are treated as dividends) are not subject to self-employment tax.If you’re an S corporation, pay yourself as little as possible in salary, as long as it’s reasonable, and as much as possible in dividends.Use a good accountant and/or tax attorney to help you establish what a minimumreasonable salary should be. Failure to do this would be a hazard to your wealth. How to Get Assets and Money into a Corporation Tax-Free Forming a corporation is similar to getting married. It is easy to get into but much harder to get out of. —Sandy Botkin Many times people want to start their corporate business by transferring personal assets to their corporation. Let’s face it—it’s certainly a lot cheaper and easier to use assets that you already own than to purchase new assets. You can transfer property to a corporation easily and tax-free if you know what you’re doing. Generally, no gain or loss is recognized 1 on the transfer of property to a corporation solely in exchange for stock in that corporation. As noted, you can’t take any loss on the transfer. Thus you generally should not transfer property that would result in a tax loss to you if you sold it. You’re better off selling the property and taking the loss. You then can transfer the net cash received to the corporation. To have no gain or loss apply, you must meet certain easy conditions: 1. You must transfer assets. It can be almost any property, such as other stock, real estate, cash, patents, copyrights, etIn fact, there’s a lot of flexibility. However, and this is a big however, you cannot transfer services for stock tax-free. It doesn’t matter Chapter OverviewYou’ll learn about the requirements for transferring property tax-free to a corporation.You’ll be aware of the congressional “gotchas” and how to avoid them.You’ll understand why you should rarely own real estate in a corporate name, especially in a regular corporation.You’ll understand the IRS filing requirements that will keep your transfers tax-free. 159if the services have been rendered in the past or will be rendered in the futurIf you do, you will be taxed as ordinary income on the fair market value of what you receive. If you both transfer property and render services for the stock, you will be taxed as compensation (ordinary income) on the portion of the stock received that applies only to the services. Example: Ted and Carol form a corporation, and each receives 50 percent of the stock. Ted transfers $100,000 cash and Carol performs some legal services and incorporation services and transfers $50,000 cash. Since some of the stock that Carol received was for services, she would be taxed on the portion that relates to the services. 2. You must receive stock for your propertThis sounds very clear-cut, but there are a few issues that you should know about. First, stock means stock and not warrants, calls, puts, or any other optionSecond, it doesn’t have to be solely for voting stock. It can even be preferred stock if you want some investors to get preferences as to dividends. For those who don’t know what preferred stock is, here’s a great definition: Preferred stock is “stock that is limited and preferred as to dividends and does not participate in corporate growth to any significant extent.”7 Thus preferred stockholders would get a flat, fixed dividend, similar to a bond. They don’t get to vote and don’t benefit significantly from the growth or equity of the company. In addition, if the company makes a lot of money, the preferred stockholders don’t get larger dividends. The use of preferred stock is normally to fix the value for estate planning and to bring in investors who want greater security in their dividends. 3. After the transfer, you must control at least 80 percent of the voting stock and at least 80 percent of all other shares of any other class of stocThis simply means that you can have some stockholders getting voting stock and some getting other types of stock, such as nonvoting or preferred stock, as long as everyone together owns at least 80 percent of the voting stock and 80 percent of all the shares of the other stocIf you and some others are organizing a newly formed corporation, you will, in all probability, receive over 80 percent control of all stock. Thus this third requirement is not normally a problem for new corporations. Also, and this is important, if you want to give away your stock (such as to your children or grandchildren) after the transfer, you may do so as long as you’re not obligated to retransfer the stock. All stock should be issued to you first; then you can do with it as you please, as far as the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is concerneTraps in Transferring Property to a New Corporation The bad news is that Congress created several traps that would result in tax to you on incorporating. The good news is that I’ll show you how to avoid them easily.Trap 1: Don’t Place a Debt on Transferred Property Right before Forming the Corporation As I said earlier, when you transfer property for stock in a corporation, you avoid all gains and losses. The corporation can even assume your indebtedness on the transferred property without any gain recognized by you or any other person who transfers propertHowever, if it appears that the principal purpose of the assumption of debt was to avoid federal income tax on the exchange, then the debt will be treated as money received and taxed to yoYuck! Generally, if a debt has been on the property for a while, at least one year, you won’t have a problem. If you place the debt on the property just within the last four to six months,13 you’d better have a great reason for doing this. An example of a good reason actually given by the IRS would be to replace an existing debt on propertAnother good reason, in my opinion, would be to refinance an existing debt at a lower interest rate. Example: Sue transfers for stock property worth $200,000, but with a debt of $50,000; the corporation assumes Sue’s debt on the property. This would be a tax-free transfer. Example: Assuming that Sue placed the debt on the property two months before transferring the property to the corporation, she probably would be taxed on the liability assumed by the corporation because the transfer was to avoid taxes. Trap 2: Don’t Receive Cash or Other Property Back from the Corporation You must transfer property for stock. If you receive anything else besides stock, such as cash or other property, you will be taxed on the receipt of the cash or property receiveExample: Mike and Gloria transfer property to form their corporation. Mike transfers $100,000 in cash, and Gloria transfers real estate worth $120,000 but gets the same amount of stock as Mike. If Gloria receives back $20,000 in order to equalize the transfer, she will be taxed on the $20,000 that she receives. Trap 3: Don’t Transfer Any Property That Has Debt Greater than Your Basis16 What does this mean? This is where you transfer property whose adjusted basis to you (cost plus improvements less depreciation taken) is less than the debt on the property. This can happen in a number of ways. Example: You pay only $100,000 for some real estate that skyrockets to $600,000 in value. You then go to a bank and refinance the property and get a loan for 80 percent of the value, or $480,000. Your basis was $100,000, which is what you paid,17 but your loan on the property is now $480,000, which is $380,000 more than your basis. If youtransfer this property with this debt, you will pay tax on the $380,000! How’s that for a congressional “gotcha”? This also can happen if you take a lot of depreciation but your debt gets paid off over a longer period than the depreciation. Your property could be completely written off, but you still have some debt. There’s a great way around this problem. In fact, if you ever have this problem, this book will pay for itself many times over. Here’s the IRS rule: You pay tax on the excess of your liabilities over your basis of the property transferred, but it’s the sum of all the liabilities for each transferor over the sum of all the adjusted bases of the properties transferred by each transferoWhat this means to you is this: Transfer more property to the corporation so that the total basis of what you transfer exceeds the total debt on the transferred property. Example: Calvin transfers some real estate to a corporation for stock. His real estate has a basis of $50,000, but there’s a mortgage of $100,000 on the property. If Calvin transfers this property alone for stock, he would pay tax on $50,000. Thus he should either not transfer this property or add some other property so that the total basis equals or exceeds the total debt. Thus, if he also adds $50,000 in cash as part of the transfer, his total basis in the real estate and cash is $100,000, which equals the debt. Thus no tax! Pretty slick, isn’t it? If Possible, Don’t Transfer Real Estate to a Regular Corporation As my opening quote notes, it’s hard to get property out of a corporation, especially a regular corporation. If you have real estate in the corporation that appreciates in value, which real estate tends to do, you may have to pay tax at the corporate level on the appreciation whenever you sell the property or liquidate the corporation19 and probably pay tax at your individual level, too. That’s double taxation! There are ways around it with reorganizations, etc., but it takes some knowledgeable tax planning. The rich have known this for years. Thus what many top tax experts are recommending is to form an LLC or a limited partnership that would own the real estate and then lease it to the corporation. In this way, you don’t have to worry about the real estate appreciation being “trapped” in the corporation, and you or your family members can receive the lease payments. Thus you can shift income to your family at lower tax brackets. Even better, you don’t need to worry about the liability being over the basis because the property wasn’t transferred to the corporation. Finally, you can take a deduction for the depreciation of the real estate on your individual tax return or the tax return of your family members if they’re part owners. The real estate losses and depreciation won’t be locked into the corporation because a flowthrough entity owns the real estate, so all losses flow through to you and your family or the owners of the flowthrough entity. What a great country this is!Don’t Forget to Attach the Required Schedules to Your Tax Return There’s a price for all these nice tax-free goodies: You get to somewhat enrich your accountant. The IRS requires a statement to your tax return noting a complete description of the property transferred, a complete description of what you received in exchange (including other property received), a complete description of the stock received, and a description of any liabilities that were assumeIn addition, if this isn’t bad enough, you need to attach a similar description to the corporate tax returns. To transfer property to a corporation tax-free, transfer it for the stock in the corporation.Do not receive warrants or options. This isn’t deemed stock.The stock can be preferred stock as long as there’s no mandatory buyback.Don’t transfer property that would result in a loss if sold. You will lose the loss. It’s better to sell the property and transfer the cash instead.Don’t transfer services for stock, or you’ll be taxed on the fair market value of the stock attributable for those services.All the transferors in total should own at least 80 percent of the voting stock and 80 percent of all shares of other stock issued.You can have the corporation assume any liabilities on the transferred property. Just don’t place any liabilities on the property within one year (to be safe) before the transfer, unless you have one heck of a good corporate reason.Don’t transfer property whose liabilities exceed your basis. If this is a problem, transfer other property so that the total basis of the properties transferred equals or exceeds the total of the liabilities assumed.Don’t forget that if you receive anything other than stock from the transfer, you may pay tax on what you receive.Don’t have a regular corporation own real estate. Do what the rich do: Form either an LLC or a limited partnership to own the real estate, and lease it to the corporation. The proper avoidance of taxes is the only intellectual pursuit that still carries any reward. —John Maynard Keynes, economist, OEconomic Consequences of the Peace (1920) ne of the biggest questions that I get at my seminars is, “How do I get money tax-free out of my corporate business?” The answer is to establish a load of tax-free fringe benefits. In fact, this chapter could be subtitled “Getting Money Out of a Corporation Tax-Free.” If starting a successful small business is the engine behind riches, then fringe benefits are the wheels and the frame around this engine. You’ve probably heard about how many of the big, rich corporations are providing a host of benefits to their employees. The interesting fact is that most of these benefits can be provided by small businesses as well. It’s just that most small business owners never find out about what choices are available to them. Chapter OverviewLearn about one of the fringe benefits that all corporations should have: tax-free use of property, equipment, and services, also known as working-condition fringe benefits.Understand the little-known way to get many fringe benefits with the no-extra-cost approach.Learn how to get day-care assistance for you and your employees on a tax-free basis.Understand the new and improved rules for company-provided adoption assistance.Learn why you should get your medical, dental, and nursing home insurance for yourself and your employees tax-free.Set up a self-insured medical reimbursement pla1The myth that “my accountant takes care of my taxes” has kept people ignorant about all the amazing fringe benefits that are available. You will find some fabulous information in this chapter that, in many cases, isn’t available elsewhere. It will give you a good overview of every available fringe benefit that I can suggest for small and midsized businesses. Use the various benefits as a checklist for your business. Although time and space do not permit me to discuss every detail involved in all fringe benefits, and a whole book could be devoted to this subject alone, I give a good overview of what’s required to establish each benefit and to bulletproof the benefit from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). I also discuss any drawbacks to each benefit that you should be aware of, such as discrimination problems. I should note that I discuss only benefits that would be available to small-business owners and not necessarily only to publicly traded corporations, although all the benefits mentioned here can and have been used by even the biggest companies. Pay particular attention to which benefits can be offered to both owners and employees, which benefits can be offered only if you don’t discriminate (which would be most of the benefits), and which benefits have limitations on what can be offered to owner/stockholders. In addition, although all these benefits assume that you’re operating as a corporation, many also apply to other entities, such as limited-liability corporations (LLCs) and sole proprietorships. All in all, using the information in this chapter will result in huge tax savings that will pay for this book many times over. For a number of benefits, you cannot discriminate in favor of highly compensated individuals, stockholders, or owners of 5 percent or more of stock or profit interest. Highly compensated people for purposes of this book are people who make over $120,000 per year or who own 5 percent or more of the stock or who own .(Cont.)Learn about providing tax-free disability insurance, and understand the one IRS loophole to obtaining the benefits tax-free.Understand the little-known de minimis fringe benefits.Learn when you can give property at a sizable discount to employees (qualified employee discounts).Learn how you can deduct your exercise equipment and set up a gym courtesy of the IRS.Have your company provide retirement advice tax-free.Learn how to get a low-interest or even no-interest loan from your company tax-free.Learn how you can get your company to pay for employee educational expenses and have them be tax-free to the recipient.Understand the rules for obtaining as much as $5,250 per year of educational assistance for employees’ children for college costs tax-free.Learn when you can pay country club and health club dues and have the benefit be tax-free to the employee.Understand when companyprovided trips to wonderful destinations can be tax-free.Learn about the benefit to your company of buying your home and getting all those closing costs tax-free.Learn why your company should provide tax-free moving expenses for you and your employees.Learn about when you can have employer-provided transportation, such as limos and chauffeurs, tax-frepercent or more of the business. Thus, throughout Part 3 of this book, this is what I mean when I state that you can’t discriminate in favor of highly compensated people. Tax-Free Use of Property, Equipment, and Services You’re going to like this. This is one of the broadest ways to obtain tax-free fringe benefits. This benefit is also known as working-condition fringe benefits. These types of benefits are defined as “any property or services given to an employee by an employer that would have been deductible or depreciable by the employee as a business expense had the employee paid for the property or services.”1 It applies, however, only to employees and not to their dependents—sorry!2 Here are some examples:Most business publicationsBusiness-oriented booksUse of employer-provided cars to the extent used for businessComputers used for businessCell phonesFax machinesMemberships in business-oriented associationsMemberships to business-oriented Web sitesJob-placement assistance if it results in some benefit to the employer, such as raising the morale of remaining workers, and the placement is in the same or similar trade or business Example: Sam runs his insurance business as a corporation. He wants to receive memberships in the local Chamber of Commerce and life underwriters association. He also wants to receive various publications for insurance agents and various sales publications. His corporation may provide Sam with these memberships and subscriptions as tax-free working-condition fringe benefits because Sam could have deducted the cost of these publications and memberships had he spent the money himself. You may be wondering why a working-condition fringe benefit is such a good deal because the employee could have deducted the cost of such an item anyway. Good question! The reason is that when an employee takes a deduction for business-related expenses, it’s as an itemized, nonbusiness deduction. These types of deductions have phaseouts and must exceed a threshold amount of 2 percent of your adjusted gross income (net income from a business plus wages, dividends, pensions, rents, etc.). However, if the employer provides these benefits, they are fully deductible by the corporation and tax-free to the employee. There are no phaseouts and no threshold amounts that they must exceed. Thus you get the full benefit of the deduction. Example: Marjorie operates her network marketing business as an S corporation. She wants to subscribe to various home-based business publications and subscribe to special services for networkers, such as The Greatest Networker Web site maintained by the well-known John Milton Fogg George Madeau. If her corporation pays for these subscriptions, she may receive these benefits tax-free.Discrimination Is Fully Allowable This is one benefit in which Congress allows for any type of discrimination, even if the benefit is provided only to the officers or directors or other highly compensated employees of the company. You just can’t discriminate when providing any product testing. Don’t ask me why!3 Example: Sock’em Corporation provides cell phones and computers only to its executive officers. These benefits are fully deductible by Sock’em and tax-free to the employees even though they’re not provided to all employees. What Is an Employee? The working-condition fringe benefit applies to employees. Strangely, however, Congress allows many people to be treated as employees that you would never have thought would qualify for this one benefit. For example, for purposes of this rule, employees would include partners and members of the board of directors (although board members can’t be used in any product testing). In addition, independent contractors are allowed to be given working-condition fringe benefits on a tax-free basis as long as they don’t involve parking or product testinSelf-employed owners are not deemed employees under this rule; however, they can deduct these items anyway as business deductions without any limitation. Thus, in effect, they get the benefits too. I often wonder what Congress was thinking when it carved out such limited exceptions as product testing and parking for independent contractors. This simply adds needless complexity for some narrow exceptions. Consumer Testing of Products by Employees Your corporation can provide employees with products to test and evaluate that are manufactured by you for sale to customers. However, to avoid taxation of the employee on the receipt or use of these products, you must meet the following conditions:6It would be a normal expense of the employer (which is usually the case).Valid business reasons necessitate that the products be tested off the premises of the employer.The products are indeed furnished for testing and evaluation.The products are available to the employee for a period that isn’t longer than needed for testing and evaluation.At the end of the testing period, the item is returned to the employer.The employee must submit detailed reports on his or her evaluation.The length of the testing and evaluation period is reasonable for the product.The employer imposes strict limits on personal use, such as a prohibition against nonemployees using the product.7The employer does not discriminate against highly compensated people in thetesting unless it can show a good reason.No-Additional-Cost Fringe Benefits A company may provide services to employees on a tax-free basis and IRS-bulletproof this benefit if it meets these conditions:The services are offered to customers in the ordinary course of business. 8The company doesn’t incur substantial additional cost in providing these benefits. You could provide services at no additional cost, for example, when you have excess capacity. Example: The Shipandstore Corporation provides air transit services and hotel rooms to customers. If there are some free spaces in the plane or some unoccupied hotel rooms, the corporation may provide these tax-free to its employees. The key to this fringe benefit is that the services offered are in the same line of business as the employer and normally are offered to nonemployee customers. Example: The Foolproof Bank offers car washes to nonemployees in order to raise funds for charity. This is not the business of the bank, and free car washes provided to employees would not qualify as no-additional-cost fringe benefits. Even if the employee agrees to reimburse the employer for the increased cost, this would not qualify as a tax-free fringe benefit. The following example illustrates this point. Example: High-Cost Computer, Inc. (HCC), repairs computers. Jane is an employee with some big computer problems. HCC fixes her computer. The normal retail cost to fix it would have been $500 for labor and materials, but the actual out-of-pocket cost would have been only $100. Even if Jane reimburses HCC for the $100 cost, she would be taxed on the $400 of extra benefit. This is not a no-additional-cost benefit because HCC paid $100 to provide $500 worth of benefits. Jane’s reimbursement does not alter this fact. Discrimination Toward Owners or Highly Compensated People Not Allowed Sadly, you can’t discriminate in favor of highly compensated people or owners of the business who hold 5 percent or more of the stocThe Bottom Line For this benefit to be tax-free, the employer must not incur any extra cost, and the benefit provided must be the same services as provided to customers in the employer’s normal course of business. Tax-Free Day-Care Assistance You can provide day care tax-free to all employees10 up to a maximum of $5,000 per year ($2,500 if married filing separately).11 The self-employed are considered employees under this rule. Hooray! Even partnerships can offer this benefit to partners who are treated as employeeMoreover, you can either pay for the employees’ day care directly or reimburse the employees for the expenseHow’s that for flexibility? However, you cannot discriminate in favor of highly compensated people or owners or stockholders who have a 5 percent or more interest in stock or profits of the company, and there are limitations on the benefits that can accrue to the owners as well. This will be discussed below. Requirements to Bulletproof Tax-Free Day Care from the IRS In order to receive this benefit tax-free, you must meet all the following requirements:The plan must provide employees with dependent care to children who are under age 13 or to any other dependents who are either physically or mentally incapable of caring for themselves.You must have a separate, written plan. It doesn’t have to be long and fancy, but you must have a plan in writing that shows who will get the benefits and what these benefits will be. You also have to notify the other employees of the availability of this benefit. You just can’t keep it secret. Nice try!A company cannot discriminate in favor of highly compensated employees, more than 5 percent owners, or more than 5 percent stockholders. However, even if a company is found to be discriminating, those employees who are not highly compensated or do not own 5 percent or more of the stock or more than 5 percent of the business will have their benefits tax-free.The employee must provide some documentation to the employer, such as the name, address, and social security number or Taxpayer Identification Number of the provider. See your accountant about this.Even if you give this benefit to everyone, you can’t have more than 25 percent of the total benefits go to any stockholder or business owner who owns more than 5 percent of the stock or the business. I personally find this extremely irritating, not to mention idiotic, that Congress would place a limit on the benefits available to owners even if they don’t discriminate. This only complicates the tax law. Why place a limit on benefits to business owners if there’s no discrimination? In addition, placing limits on benefits to owners hurts the small-business owner who may not have lots of employees, and in many cases, these people need the help the most. I should note that you cannot have your child be the day-care provider if he or she is under age 19 by year’s end or your dependent even if over age 19. Once your child hits age 19 and stops being your dependent, he or she can be a qualified provider for the other childreThe same rule would apply to any other relative, such as an employee’s parents. If an employee pays one of his or her parents to take care of the employee’s children, these payments would be tax-free if the parent was not a dependent of theemployee. This might be a great way to get your parents some money and to take care of your child-care problems at the same time. Company-Provided Adoption Assistance There’s a big demand from couples to adopt children. Because of this, Congress created a nice fringe benefit for adoption expenses. A company can set up a qualified plan and pay up to $14,890 in 2022 of adoption expenses per child15 on a tax-free basiQualifications Needed to Bulletproof This Benefit from the IRS In order for a company to provide these benefits tax-free, the adoption assistance must meet the following criteria:The plan must be in writing, and all eligible employees must be notified.The plan must be nondiscriminatory. However, unlike the day-care assistance benefit, there’s no limit on how much goes to the owners or stockholders. The plan just can’t discriminate in favor of highly compensated people, 5 percent or more stockholders, or 5 percent or more owners. Unfortunately, what Congress gives, it also takes away. The tax credit for the benefits starts phasing out as your adjusted gross income (AGI) exceeds $223,410 in 2022 and completely phases out if your AGI exceeds $263,410 in 2022.17 As a reminder, your AGI generally means any net income from a business plus dividends, interest, rents, penalties, and wages, with a few further modifications. The following examples will illustrate how the phaseout works. Example: John and Mary have an AGI of $243,410 in 2022. If they receive from Mary’s employer $6,000 of expenses, only one-half, or $3,000, is tax-free. The other $3,000 is taxable. The reason is that they earn $20,000 more than the allowable $243,510, halfway to the $40,000 phaseout. If their AGI were $233,410, one-fourth through the $40,000 phaseout range, one-fourth ($1,500) would be taxable and three-fourths ($4,500) would be tax-free. Although this is not a tax policy book, think about what Congress has done. This program essentially subsidizes poor to middle-class taxpayers to adopt children and discourages wealthy people, who can best afford children. Also, if you operate as an S corporation and own more than 2 percent of the outstanding stock, any adoption assistance must be included in wages and also subject to FICA taxes. Of course, you can claim the adoption credit on your individual tax return subject to certain income limitations. However, you are generally better off paying for any adoption assistance individually and taking the credit on your tax return.Tax-Free Health Insurance One of the big disadvantages of being solely an employee (among the others mentioned in Chapter 1) is that you can deduct only medical insurance premiums and other medical expenses that exceed a very high threshold, 10 percent (or 7.5 percent if you are age 65 or older) of your AGI—your net income from a business plus wages, interest, dividends, pensions, and some other modificationThus, unless you have a huge amount of medical and dental expenses, you likely won’t get any deduction for these expenses. However, if you have a side business, your business can provide you and your employees and their families with health insurance 100 percent tax-freMoreover, you just need to pay for the insurance premiums. No written plan is required, and the benefit is available to all forms of business, whether incorporated, partnerships, or even self-employeIn fact, health insurance almost always should be provided because of the tremendous flexibility of this benefit. For example, long-term care insurance is deemed to be health insurance,21 as are Medicare supplement premiumCompanies even can cover domestic partners, although for the payments to be tax-free for an employee, the domestic partner must qualify as a dependent of the employeIn addition, a company even can reimburse the employee for the insurance premiums paid under the following conditions:24The employer has a plan for health insurance coverage.The employer requires the employees to prove what actually was spent on health insurance. Being able to reimburse employees becomes essential, especially for small-business owners, whenever an employee would not be able to get coverage because of preexisting conditions. Finally, and this is my favorite benefit of providing health insurance premiums, the health insurance can be provided on a discriminatory basis. You just can’t discriminate based on health factors,25 and it must seem to cover employees, not just stockholders or ownerMedical insurance must be nondiscriminatory but can have the same exceptions as that of the self-insured medical plans. Example: Harry provides health insurance to all his full-time employees but charges a premium for those with prior health problems. This would be prohibited. However, if Harry provided health insurance to all the officers, regardless of health problems, and a lesser plan to other employees, this would be allowable. The bottom line is that this is a great, flexible fringe benefit that most firms should provide regardless of size and regardless of entity. This deduction has not be affected by the TCJA. If you operate as an S corporation and own more than 2 percent of the stock, you need to go through a three-step process:First, get your S corporation to pay all health premiums for you and your spouse and dependents. Second, include these payments on your W-2 as income but are exempt from FICA taxes. Third, deduct these premiums on your individual tax return (IRS Form 1040) under the line for a “self employed health insurance deduction,” which is a deduction from adjusted gross income. Thus, you have no threshold that you must exceed. Set Up a Self-Insured Medical Reimbursement Plan This is a plan that covers all your medical expenses that are not covered by insurance, such as mileage to and from the doctor, deductibles, coinsurance, braces and other dental expenses, hearing aids, chiropractic therapy, over-the-counter medication that alleviates a medical condition, and much more. This is in addition to your health insurance. You’re not dropping your health insurance coverage. However, this is much more limited for 2 percent or more owners of S corporations and partnerships. See the detailed discussion in Chapter 4 on this topic. Provide for Disability Insurance Disability insurance covers two situations: loss of income owing to being disabled from an accident or illness and payments for the loss of a bodily function, a limb, or an organ. Loss of a Bodily Function, a Limb, or an Organ Payments made for the loss of a bodily function or a limb are tax-deductible for your company and tax-free for the employeExample: Juan works in a machine shop and loses an eye. The company provides disability benefits, paying $100,000 for the loss of a bodily function or an organ. The $100,000 that Juan receives is tax-free. Disability Owing to Accident or Illness Today, there’s a much better chance of being injured by accident or suffering a longterm illness than dying. Sadly, when a catastrophe of this nature occurs, few would have the ability to continue their income if they could not work. This is the purpose of disability insurance. Interestingly, companies have two options regarding disability premiums paid to an insurance company. The premiums can be either tax-free to the employee or taxable to the employeThere’s a drawback to each option. If they’re tax-free to the employee, then the benefits would be taxable to the employee if he or she gets paid on the policy. However, if the employee gets taxed on the premiums or in fact pays the premiums, then the benefits are not taxablExample: Wise Corp. provides disability insurance on all its employees tax-free. Joan, an employee, becomes seriously injured in a car accident that keeps her out of work for six months. All payments to her will be fully taxable because the premiums were tax-free. IRS-Approved Tax-Planning Strategy The IRS has ruled in a private ruling30 that an employee who had paid the total premiums for disability coverage in the policy year in which he suffered a disability and received payments would not be liable for taxes on those payments, even though his employer had paid the premiums in previous years. In other words, all disability payments that the employee received would be allocable to his payments and would not be taxable. Isn’t this an amazing country? What this means to you is simple. Have your company deduct all premiums and treat them as tax-free to all the employees. However, in the year of a disability, have the company treat the premiums as taxable to the disabled employee; thus it will make the benefits tax-free. Example: Joan is permanently injured in a car accident. If in the year of the injury she were taxed on the premiums paid by her employer, the benefits would seem to be tax-free. As a final note, self-employed taxpayers or S-corporation shareholders who own more than 2 percent of the stock or partners are not employeeThus a self-employed person cannot deduct disability insurance premiums. However, the benefits then would be tax-free. The Bottom Line All companies should provide for disability coverage and should both deduct the premiums and treat them as a tax-free benefit to the employee. If the benefit is for loss of a bodily function, the benefit is always tax-free. If the benefit is for loss of income owing to sickness or accident, treat the last year’s payment as income, and the benefits should become tax-free as well, not withstanding what was done in the prior years. If you operate as an S corporation and own more than 2 percent of the stock, you would include these payments as income on your W-2, but they are excempt from FICA taxes. This actually can be a benefit since if you collect disability payments from these policies, the payments are tax-free since you were taxed on the premiums. De Minimis Fringe Benefits and Occasional Supper Money Your company can provide any employee—even if it discriminates in favor of officers or highly compensated people32—property or services under both the following conditions:33The value of the property or services is so small or inconsequential as to not warrant an accounting.The property or services are not provided too frequently. Thus, even if a fringe benefit were small in value but provided daily, it would not be deemed de minimis. It must be both infrequent and inconsequential to be a de minimis fringe benefit. Example: Financial Destiny is a small corporation that provides income opportunities. If it provides a one-time payment of $1,000 to an employee, this would not be deemed inconsequential and would be fully taxable. Example: Financial Destiny also provides bus fare for some employees daily. Even though the value of this benefit is inconsequential, it’s provided too frequently, so the total value of the fares would not be considered inconsequential. Any use of an employer-provided car, constant use of a season tickets, or membership in a country club would not be a de minimis benefit. Such benefits may qualify as working-condition fringe benefits, however. Examples of De Minimis Benefits Now that you know what benefits are not de minimis, here are some de minimis benefits that can be provided:Occasional typing of a personal letter by a secretaryWeekly coffee and donutsHoliday gifts of low valueHoliday turkeys if the cost is usually less than $25Occasional theater and season ticketsFree soft drinksOccasional use of the copy machine, fax machine, or other similar equipment if personal use is less than 15 percent34 The IRS strangely has noted that monthly transit passes that cost no more than $21 would be deemed de minimis if paid to an employeBut it doesn’t treat the self-employed as employees. Sorry! If you operate as an S corporation and own more than 2 percent of the stock, there is no problem for you. This benefit is available for everyone and all entities. Occasional Supper Money The IRS allows the payment of occasional supper money under all three of the following conditions:36The supper money is provided occasionally and not regularly.The supper money allows an extension of the normal workday.The supper money enables the employee to work overtime. This benefit applies only to employees. Thus, if you’re self-employed, you can’t give yourself supper money. You can, however, give it to any employee of yours. In addition, if you incorporate your business, you then become an employee of that business and are eligible to receive supper money. The key is that supper money can be provided to anyone or everyone if there’s a need for emergency overtime. It can’t be based on hours worked, such as $3 of supper money for each hour of overtime. Thus, if you have a business that requires some overtime owing to a time crunch or emergency, you can provide supper money. Example: Footer Podiatry, Inc., has a crunch of business once or twice a month. If the employees work two extra hours of overtime, the company can provide tax-free supper money. If this happens every week, this probably would be deemed too frequent and would be taxable. I’ve spoken with the IRS ruling division about this. Their policy is to allow supper money if it isn’t provided too frequently, such as two or three times a month. Thus, if you have overtime required of employees that does not exceed three days a month, you should be able to provide a reasonable amount of supper money tax-free. Limit the money to what it would cost one person to eat in a medium-priced restaurant. Paying $100 per day for supper money probably would not be reasonable. The Bottom Line I don’t consider de minimis fringe benefits the top benefit in this chapter. They have a narrow application and, as the name indicates, can’t be too beneficial. However, when you consider all the items that can be deemed de minimis, such as occasional supper money, these benefits can add up and not be de minimis to you or your company. Qualified Employee Discounts How would you like to be able to provide your employees with tax-free discounts on a wide range of products and services? Well, you can, and it’s easy to implement in any company of any size. The term qualified employee discounts means giving your employees property or services that you normally provide to the public in your company’s ordinary course of business but you provide them at a discounted price to your employees. If you provide qualified employee discounts, the employees receive the property or services tax-freExample: Safecracking, Inc., runs a nationwide banking consulting service. If the company provides discounts on banking fees to its employees, this would be a qualified employee discount. However, if it purchases and distributes season’s tickets for the Redskins football games, this would not be a qualified employee discount because the company is not in the business of selling season tickets.A company can provide discounts on any product or service that it offers to the public—with the following exceptions:Stocks and bondsCommoditiesReal estateMoney It’s too bad that Congress passed these exceptions. I would have loved to work for a currency house or a bank and get discounts on money. Wouldn’t you? Limitations on Qualified Employee Discounts Besides limiting discounts to qualified property, Congress has placed some limitations on the amount of the discount. As a result of some “tax simplification,” the rules vary depending on whether you’re providing services or property. If you’re providing a service, such as a flight or legal service, you can allow up to a 20 percent tax-free discounExample: The law firm of Shaft and Shaft provides legal services to all its staff members at a discount. If the normal fees are $300 per hour, it can offer the legal services at a 20 percent discount, charging $240 per hour. If it offers these services for $100 per hour, the $140 “excess” discount would be taxable to the employeIf your firm provides discounts on property, the amount of the discount can’t exceed the gross profit percentagYou might be wondering what this means! The gross profit percentage is the sale price minus the cost of the property. Thus, in effect, you can offer the property at your company’s cost. Why Congress couldn’t use the term cost of the property instead of gross profit percentage is beyond me. Example: HP offers computers to its employees at a discount. If the normal price of a computer to customers is $2,000 but the profit that HP makes on each computer is $500, the company can offer its computers to its employees at $1,500. Anything above this discount would be taxable to the employee. Nondiscrimination Rules In order to provide qualified employee discounts, you must offer them on a nondiscriminatory basis. You can’t give the discounts just to the officers and other highly paid individuals. However, if you do discriminate, the discounts are still tax-free to employees who are not 5 percent owners of the stock or business or who make less than $130,000 in 2021 and $135,000 in 2022. There’s a bit of sunshine here. There are some employees who can be deemed ineligible for the discounts:Employees who have less than one year of service with the companyEmployees who normally work less than 17.5 hours per weekSeasonal employees who normally work less than six months per yearEmployees who are under age 21Employees who are subject to a collective-bargaining agreement (union contract)Employees who normally work less than 1,000 hours per year41 As you can see from some of the fringe benefits, part-time workers need not be offered many benefits. Maybe this is the reason so many companies are hiring employees on a part-time or seasonal basis. The Bottom Line Qualified employee discounts can be a real benefit to companies and to their employees. They’re available, however, only for products and services normally provided to the general public. Also, if they are services, the discount is limited to 20 percent. If the discounts are for property, they’re generally limited to the gross profit percentage, which means that the employee can pay the cost of the property. Deducting Exercise Equipment and a Gym As we’ve read in many news articles, exercise is being touted as a partial cure for many ailments. Wouldn’t it be great if you could deduct the cost of exercise equipment, tennis courts, and even a gym and provide these items tax-free to your employees and, if incorporated, to yourself? The answer is that you can! Requirements to Bulletproof Company-Provided Athletic Facilities from the IRS In order to make this benefit tax-free, you must meet several well-defined tests:42The equipment or gym generally must be on the company premises or leased or owned by the employer. (Thus it doesn’t have to be physically in the same building as all the employees.)The equipment or gym must be operated by the company.The equipment or gym must be used substantially by employees of the company, their spouses, and their dependent children. There are a couple of implications that can be derived from these rules. First, you can’t pay for a health or country club membership because these clubs would be used by the general public and not substantially by your employeeSecond, the facilities must be run or operated by the company. This means that you can’t deduct the use of a resort with facilities such as tennis or a swimming pool, which would be part of the association dues. In addition, the IRS has noted that employees can include partners and employees who are separated from the company (either through retirement or disability).Example: Your company provides a gym in the office for your employees. The gym is staffed by personnel paid by the company. The gym would be fully deductible and taxfree to the employees. If the company paid for health club memberships, on the other hand, this would not be tax-free to the employees. In addition, the athletic facility must not be offered only to officers or highly paid employees. Most staff members should be allowed to use the facility. Self-employed individuals ordinarily cannot give themselves this fringe benefit because self-employed individuals are not considered to be employees. However, if you’re self-employed and you hire your spouse and/or other family members, they become your employees. If you place a gym in the location where your family employees work, you may be able to deduct the cost of the gym and the equipment. It’s vital, however, that only employees or their family members use this facility. Thus don’t let your friends use the gym. Keep an exercise log for everyone using the facility. What Types of Facilities Can Be Operated Under This Fringe Benefit? Under this benefit, you can deduct and provide on a tax-free basis the following types of items:GymsExercise equipmentTennis courtsSwimming poolsGolf courses I really like the idea of being able to provide a golf course to my employees tax-free, but the cost would be prohibitive to small businesses. However, remember what I stated earlier: “Where there’s a will, there’s a lawyer.” Check out the next exception. In case you don’t have the hundreds of thousands or, in the case of golf courses, millions necessary to provide this benefit to your employees, there’s a great exception from having your company pay all the costA company can have an agreement with other employers to operate the gym, golf course, or swimming pool. Thus, you find a company currently providing this benefit to its employees and cut a deal to pay rent or a fee so that your employees can use this facility. I should note that you must cut a deal with another company that provides this benefit solely to its employees. You can’t go to a general health club or a country club and do the same thing. This is another idiotic rule passed by Congress. I can pay IBM to let my staff use a golf course that it owns and operates, along with employees of other companies that pay IBM for use of this course, but we can’t pay a health club or a country club to do the same thing. Am I missing the point, or is this dumb?Sandy’s tax tip: Normally, self-employed individuals (otherwise known as sole proprietors) can’t set up a deductible gym for themselves. However, if you were to hire your spouse and provide the gym in the location where your spouse works, such as your home, the gym should be deductible if used by you and your dependent children as well. This option, however, has not been tested yet. The Bottom Line This is a terrific and often overlooked benefit. Just have your company either operate the athletic facility or pay rent to another company that’s operating a facility for its own employees. Retirement Advice Congress has long been concerned with the lack of retirement planning of most people. In fact, according to a Harvard University study, only 2 percent of the population can retire by age 65 on the same standard of living that they had before retirement. Thus, companies can provide qualified retirement services to their employees and their spouseHowever, the employer must have some kind of “qualified plan” in place, such as a pension, a profit-sharing plan, a simplified employee pension (SEP), or even a simple individual retirement account (IRA) (most of these plans will be discussed later in this chapter) so that the employees can see where this benefit fits in with all the other retirement planning. Example: Stop the Clock, Inc., wants to provide retirement planning for its employees. It hires a financial planner to meet with each employee about his or her retirement and to set up individual retirement plans for each employee and his or her spouse. If the company pays a fee for these services, it can deduct the fee, and the benefit would be tax-free to each employee if there were no discrimination. In addition, anyone, even highly compensated employees and officers, can have this tax-free benefit as long as it doesn’t discriminatThus provide it to all full-time people. The Bottom Line This is both a great benefit and a needed benefit. You’ll have happy and economically healthier employees by providing this benefit. Remember, however, that this benefit must be nondiscriminatory. Company-Provided Lowor No-Interest Loans to Employees This has got to be one of the most used and yet misunderstood fringe benefits. Unfortunately, few companies are using this benefit correctly. However, you, my faithful reader, will not have this problem because you will learn exactly what you need to do to make these loans tax-free. The rules provided by Congress are entitled “Treatment of Loans with BelowMarket Interest Rates.” These are defined as loans made to employees or even independent contractors at rates that are below the minimum rates allowed by the IRS, which are also known as the applicable federal rates. Thus, if you want to make the interest rates on these loans tax-free, there’s a minimum rate that you must charge, or the employee is taxed on the forgone interest that he or she should have paid at the applicable federal rateExample: Alice borrows $50,000 from her corporation for a 10-year period, interest-free. Because she didn’t pay interest equal to the applicable federal rate, she would be taxed on the foregone interest using this rate each year. Yuck! Applicable Federal Rates The IRS publishes the applicable federal rates each month. They’re available in your accountant’s office, or you can call the IRS at 800-IRS-1040. (Isn’t that a cute number?) There are three federal rates:Short-term rates—for loans of three years or lessMiddle-term rates—for loans over three years but not over nine yearsLong-term rates—for loans over nine years You would determine how long you want the loan and find out the latest applicable federal rate for the duration of the loan that you want. As long as you charge at least that rate, you can get these below-market loans tax-free. Also, as an estimate for you, the rate for long-term loans (over nine years) approximates the prime rate, whereas the rate for short-term loans is approximately one-half the prime rate. Thus the longer the duration, the more you must charge in interest. Fabulous Exceptions to the Below-Market Loan Rules 1. $10,000 de minimis exception. The below-market loan rules do not apply to loans of $10,000 or less, which means that you can charge no or little interesHowever, if the amount is above $10,000, the rules apply even if you pay down the debt below $10,000.49 Example: You borrow $10,000 from your corporation, interest-free. This would be an exception to the rules, and you would not pay any tax on the foregone interest. Example: You borrow $15,000 from your corporation, interest-free. This would not be an exception even if you pay the loan down below $10,000. You’re taxed on each year’s forgone interest. 2. Employee-relocation mortgage loans made in connection with a new place of work. One fabulous exception would be to provide mortgage loans to employees as part of a transfer to a new locatioYour new job location has to change, so you would qualify for the moving deduction. Generally, this means that your new job location should be on the other side of the city at least 50 miles away or, even better, in another city or another state. If you qualify, you can charge little or no interest. The new workplace would have to be at such a distance from the employee’s old residence as to require at least an additional 50 miles of commute. In other words, if the distance between the new site and the old residence is at least 50 miles greater than the distance between the old site and the old residence, the distance requirement is fulfilled. Hooray! Remember that I told you that we have good tax laws. You just have to know about them. Requirements to Bulletproof Relocation Loans from the IRS Nothing comes for free. To qualify, you must meet the following five easy tests:51The loan can’t be for the purpose of avoiding taxes. This isn’t usually a problem unless, for example, only the owner of the company gets it, and it isn’t provided to other relocating employees.The benefits of this loan aren’t transferable to a new buyer.The benefits of this loan are conditioned on continued future performance of substantial services by the employee. Thus the loan agreement could provide that “if the employee ceases working for the company, the applicable federal rate of interest will be charged the employee” or that “the loan will terminate and must be paid off within six months of termination.”The employee must give a statement that the employee would itemize deductions on his or her tax return for each outstanding year. In other words, the employee would certify that he or she would be able to take a deduction for the interest on his or her federal tax return.The loan agreement provides that the mortgage money can be used only to buy a personal residence and not an investment propertIn short, you have to use the residence as your home and not rent it out. Example: Karen works for the I’ve Been Moved Company (IBM). She is relocated from New York to California, and the company provides a no-interest mortgage for 15 years. As long as she uses the mortgage to buy a principal residence, is required to work for the company in order to keep receiving this benefit, and certifies that she will file an itemized return (Schedule A) with her federal tax return, the forgone interest would be tax-free. Any company of any size can offer this benefit to any employee of the company. Self-employed individuals are not employees, nor are independent contractors. This benefit is also very good for motivating and retaining an employee. What employees would want to leave a job if they were getting a tax-free mortgage that they would have to refinance at the going market interest rate if they quit? I should note that this benefit is also available to corporate officers and to corporate owners as long as they are employees of the company. 3. Bridge loans. If you don’t want to tie up your company’s money in a mortgage, you can provide a no-interest or low-interest bridge loan to hold an employee until he orshe is able to get a permanent mortgage on the real estate. To make this benefit taxfree, you must meet not only all the criteria for mortgage loans but also the following three criteria:53The loan agreement with the employee must provide that the employee must pay off the loan in full within 15 days of selling his or her principal residence.The total amount of all bridge loans must be less than the equity of the old house sold.The old house must be sold and not converted into investment property. As you can see, making a tax-free temporary loan (bridge loan) is more complicated than simply providing a mortgage. However, you may not want to tie up company funds in a long-term interest-free or low-interest commitment. Bridge loans are ideal in that they are short-term, temporary loans provided until the employee sells the former residence and has the funding to buy a new home. A corporation may provide bridge loans to the owners/stockholders. A sole proprietorship may provide them to employees—but not to the owner! The Bottom Line In order to provide tax-free below-market loans, either you must charge what the applicable federal rate would be for your loan’s duration (which can be obtained from the IRS or your accountant) or you must meet one of the exceptions—loans of less than $10,000, relocation mortgage loans, or bridge loans. Make sure that you meet all the criteria noted in this book, and you will bulletproof this nice tax-free fringe benefit from the IRS. It also will provide for much more loyal employees because if they leave, this benefit can terminate. Employer Educational Assistance and Other Tuition Plans One big question that I get from most small-business owners is, “Can I provide my employees or my employed children with a tax-free tuition payment each year?” There’s good news and bad news here. The good news is that there are several possible ways to provide for tax-free tuition money: an educational assistance plan or tax-free use of property, equipment, or services, otherwise known as a workingcondition fringe benefit. We’ll discuss each of these in the order presented. The bad news is that for small businesses, most of these plans won’t benefit the owner significantly but will benefit most of the employees of the business. Generally, any educational expense paid for an employee or for a member of an employee’s family is deductible by the company but taxable to the employee, unless you meet one of the exceptions noted below!Educational Assistance Programs You can set up an educational assistance program for your employees and pay up to $5,250 per year for tuition, fees, books, and supplieHowever, you cannot provide meals, lodging, transportation, or payments for sports, games, or hobbies unless they are part of a degree program. Example: Jim is studying computers and takes some gym courses to keep in shape. His employer may not reimburse him for the gym courses. However, if Jim were studying exercise physiology and the gym courses were part of the curriculum, his employer could make such payments tax-free. No discrimination is allowed in favor of business owners or highly compensated employees; however, employees of sole proprietorships can use this benefit. Now, for the bad news: No more than 5 percent of the total benefits can be paid to a stockholder who owns more than 5 percent of the stock or to an individual who owns 5 percent or more of the business even if you don’t discriminate in any way. Yuck! If you have very few employees using this plan, you won’t meet this requirement because more than 5 percent of the benefits will be benefiting the owner. Thus small-business owners get shafted because they can’t avoid this 5 percent coverage, but larger businesses won’t have a problem. You can, however, provide this assistance to your employees, such as your child, who do not have a 5 percent or more stock or business ownership interest. Working-Condition Fringe Benefit Although this was covered earlier, some special rules are applicable here. Even if you don’t qualify for tax-free treatment as an educational assistance program, you may be able to deduct the courses and provide tax-free assistance as a working-condition fringe benefit if you meet certain criteria:55The educational expense would have been deductible by the employee if paid by the employee. This means that it doesn’t qualify the employee for a new trade or business. (See author’s note below for further explanation.) 56The courses taken are related to the duties performed by the employee on the job.The employee submits receipts and an expense report for all educational reimbursementThere’s only one unclear issue here: When can an employee deduct the educational expenses? The answer is that the course must be to maintain or improve the skills needed by the employee for his or her current duties and cannot be part of a program of study to qualify the employee for a new trade or business. Thus college courses that lead to a basic college undergraduate degree would qualify for a new trade or business, as would law school and medical school courses. However, courses that would not qualify for a new trade or business, such as many postgraduate courses, would qualify as a working-condition fringe benefit. Let’s take some examples to illustrate all this. Example: Chan works for Hackers, Inc., a computer repair facility. He’s studying computers at the local college. If the company pays for his tuition, without it qualifying as an education assistance program, it would be fully taxable to Chan because he’s seeking an undergraduate degree, which is deemed to qualify most people for a new trade or business. Example: Let’s assume that Chan already has an undergraduate degree and is seeking a master’s in computers. Now, Hackers, Inc., can pay for any computer courses because these courses would be related to his job duties and would not qualify him for a new trade or business. Example: Marcia works for an accounting firm by day and goes to law school and takes some tax courses in the evening. If her firm reimbursed her for these courses, none of the reimbursement would qualify as a working-condition fringe benefit because Marcia cannot deduct law school courses that lead to a doctor of law degree. If she already had a law degree, however, and took some graduate law courses in taxation, she could receive reimbursement tax-free. The Bottom Line An educational assistance program is great, but you can’t discriminate and can’t have over 5 percent of the benefits go to the business owners or stockholders who own more than 5 percent of the stock. You also have a “fallback” position as a working-condition fringe benefit if the course is related to the employee’s duties and the course doesn’t qualify the employee for a new trade or business. Basic undergraduate courses, basic law courses that lead to the practice of law, and medical school courses that qualify a person to practice medicine would not qualify as a working-condition fringe benefit. Reimbursed Country Club and Health Club Dues Before 1987, country club dues were deductible to the extent used for business. Sadly, Congress did some “tax simplification”; thus, you know that you were shafted. Today, there’s generally no deduction for you or your company for country club or health club dueHowever, if an employee uses the club for business, any payments made for club dues would be deemed tax-free to the employee to the extent that the club is used for business under the working-condition fringe benefit rule, as discussed earlieThus, if the club were used in part for business, some of the club dues would be tax-free to the employee using the club. The dues, however, would not be deductible by the company. Example: The Getwithit Corporation pays $2,000 a year to a health and golf club for use by its marketing employee. If the employee uses the club 40 percent for business, 40 percent of the $2,000, or $800, would be tax-free to the employee, who would be taxed on the remaining $1,200.60 The employer would get no deduction for the dues.However, if the company treated the club dues as fully taxable compensation, it could deduct the entire amount as compensation and not club dues, but the employee would be taxed on the full amounExample: If, in the preceding example, Getwithit treated the $2,000 as additional compensation, it could deduct the entire amount as compensation, and the employee would get taxed on the full amount, even the portion that he or she used for business. So much for tax simplification! Thus the bottom line is that either the employer gets a deduction and the employee gets taxed on all the dues or the employer gets no deduction for the dues and the employee pays taxes on some of the dueSandy’s tax tip: The key is to have your company reimburse employees only for the business use of the club. Thus only the business portion would be disallowed as a deduction by the corporation, but the employee gets that portion tax-free. The corporation should treat the portion that’s not used for business as “additional compensation” to the employee in order to take a deduction for this portion. An employee would establish business use by keeping some form of tax diary or tax organizer showing what business was discussed each day that he or she used the club for business and the name of the person with whom it was discussed. One final point: The disallowance of the club dues deduction by Congress does not apply to other types of expenses. Thus business meals at your club would be deductiblThe same reasoning would apply to golf caddie fees, green fees, tips, etc. The bottom line is that health club, golf club, and country club dues are not deductible by a company unless it treats them as additional compensation to the employees who use the club. The company can forgo the deduction so that the employee could receive some of the benefits tax-free, but only to the extent that he or she used the club for business. Company-Provided Trips for Employees and Spouses Many companies provide their top salespeople with conventions in very desirable places as both a morale booster and, frankly, a reward for good performance. Unfortunately, as a speaker, I always seem to go to Arizona in the summer and Michigan in the winter. I’m definitely doing something wrong! We discussed in great depth in Chapter 3 the rules for employees to deduct business trips. Generally, for a trip to be tax-free, the majority of the days must be for business. Training activities must predominate each day, other than weekend days that are sandwiched between business days. In addition, each day would be a business day if the employee attended at least four hours and one second of meetings or it were either a travel day or a sandwiched weekend day. See Chapter 3 for a more detailed analysis of this.The key question that often arises is what happens if the spouse comes along? Congress actually has thought of this and provides that you can bring your spouse and either get a tax-free reimbursement or deduct the cost if you are not reimbursed—if you meet one of two tests:Your spouse is licensed in your business. (If you are an insurance agent, for example, your spouse would have to be licensed in insurance.)Your spouse can make money for you or the company at the convention! (You’ve got to like this one!) But what does this mean? Travel costs incurred for attending business seminars are 50% deductible. Requirements to Bulletproof Tax-Free Reimbursements for Your Spouse’s Travel from the IRS The IRS provides that if your spouse is not licensed in your occupation, the company may pay his or her travel and lodging expenses under all the following conditions:The spouse is there for a bona fide business reason and not just to keep you company.There is proper substantiation for the expenses that the spouse incurs, by keeping some form of expense log, tax diary, or tax organizer. The spouse is an employee of the taxpayeThe last requirement is waived if the spouse performs convention duties, such as registering guests and monitoring attendance at the meetings, etExample: Richard takes his wife to the company convention in Orlando. Her only duties are to accompany Richard and attend some seminars for spouses. The company could either deduct none of her expenses or deduct her expenses and treat them as taxable compensation for Richard. Example: If, in the preceding example, Richard’s wife also were an employee of the company, she could attend the convention and not be taxed on the reimbursed expenses if she either attends courses related to her duties or performs functions at the convention, such as registering guests. Self-employed taxpayers have the same rules for deductibility of their spouses’ expenses on business trips. The Bottom Line The predominant reason for the trip must be business or training. Each day should consist of at least four hours and one second of training. For a spouse’s expenses to be deductible and tax-free to the spouse or the employee, there must be a valid reason for the spouse to be there, such as convention duties, or the spouse must work for the company and attend meetings related to his or her own job duties.Corporate Purchase of an Employee’s Home That Has Declined in Value I’m not sure that this is as much a fringe benefit as a tax loophole. But I should tell you about it. If an employee sells a home to his or her corporate employer, it would be considered a sale as if the employee sold it to a strange. Thus there’s little benefit to selling your principal residence to your corporation if it has appreciated in value. However, if the home has declined in value, there’s a possible benefit to the employee. If any employee, even an employee who owns 100 percent of the stock, sells his or her principal residence to the corporation at a loss, none of the loss would be deductiblI find it interesting that if you have a gain on your home, you are taxed on the gain, but if you have a loss, the government wants no part of your loss! This is another example of the “golden rule”: “He who has the gold makes the rule.” In addition, if there are sales expenses such as commissions, appraisal fees, and bank fees, the employee gets no benefit from these fees. It just accentuates the loss! Even worse, if your company reimburses an employee for the loss, the employee gets taxed on the reimbursemenYuck! Sandy’s tax tip: If an employee would have a loss on his or her residence, have the corporation purchase the house at the appraised fair market value, and then resell the house and pay all the selling expenses; although the employee would not be able to deduct the loss and also would not pay any tax because a loss would have resulted,70 he or she won’t incur additional nondeductible closing costs such as commissions. However, when the corporation incurs these expenses, it can deduct them as part of the resale of the house. Thus, in effect, the corporation is able to deduct the closing costs! Example: Martha purchased a home for $300,000 several years ago. As a result of a bad real estate market, her home is now worth $250,000. If she sells it for the fair market value of $250,000, she cannot deduct the $50,000 loss (except to the extent that she may have claimed an office in the home). Even worse, if she were to incur $15,000 in real estate commissions and $5,000 in other closing costs, she couldn’t deduct these either. Example: Assume that Martha’s company purchases the house from her for the fair market value of $250,000 and then resells the house for the same amount and, in addition, incurs the $20,000 of closing costs that Martha would have incurred. The corporation could deduct the $20,000 of costs as a loss. Everyone wins except the IRS. This will work for any corporation, whether a regular corporation or an S corporation. It also should work if you’re running your business as a partnership or a multiple-owner limited-liability corporation. It will even work for a sole proprietorship, but only for the employees of the proprietorship, not the owner.The Bottom Line If you’re incorporated or an employee in any business entity and you own a principal residence that has declined in value, let the corporation purchase the home at the fair market value and resell the home. The company then can deduct the closing costs incurred as a loss. Reimbursement for Relocating Expenses for a Qualified Move Prior to 2018, an employer could deduct the cost of reimbursing employees for their relocating expenses. This was deductible by the employer and tax free to the employee. As a result of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, no deduction is generally allowed for employer reimbursements for moving or relocation expenses. Even worse, other than for active duty military personnel, any reimbursement paid to or for relocation expenses of the employee are taxed to the employee. Although qualified moving expenses are normally not deductible, there is an exception for active-duty military personnel. All moving expense reimbursements are tax-free if paid to military personnel who changed duty stations. Company-Provided Transportation, Limos, and Chauffeurs Generally, if your corporation provides you with free transportation to the job by taxi or limo, it’s taxable. However, there’s an exception that applies in some rare instances. This transportation can be provided at a phenomenally low cost to the employee of $1.50 each way,72 regardless of cost, if you meet the following criteria:The transportation is provided because of unsafe conditions.There’s a written policy that transportation is provided only for commuting and not for personal purposes.An unrelated third party provides the transportation. (Thus you shouldn’t use your son or the owner’s brother to drive the employees.)The person transported must be a qualified employee. (Here’s the catch.) Let’s examine what all this means. Unsafe conditions means that “under the facts and circumstances, a reasonable person would consider it unsafe for the employee to walk or use public transportation at the time of the day the employee must commute.”73 Thus the employee would ordinarily have to have either walked to work or taken public transportation. If he or she had driven, this exception presumably wouldn’t apply unless you could show that there was no safe parking near the job location or that walking to or from the parking lot would have been dangerous. If you’re going to use this exception, you want to think like a prosecuting attorney. You want to show the history of crime in the area surrounding the employee’s workplace or residence at the time of the day of the commute. Perhaps getting a police recommendation to take a cab to and from work because of the unsafe conditions would be very compelling to the IRS. After all, an IRS agent is a sort of police officer, so he or she should respect a police recommendation. You can provide this benefit only to qualified employees. These are people who are not highly compensated and are not exempt from the Fair Labor Standards AcThis simply means that if they put in overtime, they will be paid at least time-and-a-half. Example: Perry Mason is a staff lawyer who works long hours for his firm. Even if Perry’s commute, which ordinarily would have been by train, could be proven dangerous, he wouldn’t normally be a qualified employee because most lawyers are not paid overtime. If he were paid overtime at overtime rates for work beyond the 40 hours, he would qualify. Finally, self-employed people cannot qualify for this benefit unless they’re incorporated. Bah, humbug! They can, however, provide this benefit for their employees. Company-provided taxis and chauffeurs may become fully deductible as a working-condition fringe benefit if these services are provided for deductible stops. For example, if you are meeting various clients, a taxi or chauffeur may be provided to drive you to each business stop. However, any payments made for tax planning, tax preparation,or stock brokerage for an employee will be taxable to the employee. The Bottom Line Although this fringe benefit is interesting, it has a very limited use, and corporate owners and officers will not be able to use it unless they’re not highly compensated. Moreover, any employee who wants to use this benefit must be subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act and be paid for overtime. Thus it would be available to traditional employees. The next fringe benefit, in Chapter 14, has some similarities but will be more widely useful. Fringe Benefits You Will Love: This fringe benefit really deals with three related benefits: corporate-provided vanpools, transit passes, and parking. Prior to the implementation of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, companies were allowed to deduct the cost of providing transit passes and parking. Employees could avoid taxation on these benefits up to $260 per month for transit passes and parkinHowever, as a result of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA), the law repealed an employer’s ability to deduct these costs after December 31, 2017.2 However, Employers may still deduct expenses incurred that are necessary to ensure the safety of an employee (e.g., late-night transportation) and business travel expenses. Employees, on the other hand, still may elect a pretax salary deferral and/ or exclude from income employer-provided transit passes, qualified parking, or transportation in a commuter highway vehicle. As noted below, employees can receive up to $270. Understand how to get corporateprovided parking and transit passes, tax-free. Learn how to get company-provided automobiles either tax-free or at a very low cost (such as $1.50 each way).Learn why cafeteria plans can result in thousands of dollars of tax-free fringe benefits and give a host of wonderful benefits.Learn how to get property such as stock tax-free for services rendered.Learn about providing the same top benefit that CEOs of major companies get—incentive stock options.Learn how to provide meals and eating facilities tax-free. Yum, yum.Learn why every business should set up a qualified profit-sharing plan, a SEP, or a SIMPLE IRA and stash away a ton of money tax-free. a month for transit passes on a tax free basis, and up to the same amount for parking. Any amounts over these limits will be taxable. Also, self-employed people are NOT employees and can’t claim any of this as tax free. The same can be said for employees of S corporations who own more than 2 percent of the outstanding stock. Qualified Transit Passes Congress wanted to encourage workers to use mass transit. Accordingly, prior to the implementation of the TCJA, companies could provide transit passes or vouchers for mass transit tax-free to their employees, up to $280 per month for each employee who would use it. Again, this benefit was not available tax-free to self-employed individuals, independent contractors, or 2 percent or more stockholders in an S corporation; however, you could discriminate when providing these benefits. In addition, as with the other benefits noted earlier, self-employed owners and S corporations could provide this benefit to their employees, just not to the owners. 3 As noted above, however, the TCJA did away with this deduction. Employees, however, can elect to receive up to $280 per month for transit passes and parking taxfreIf, however, you are a 2 percent or greater stockholder of an S corporation, the value of the transit passes are fully taxable for both income tax and FICA taxes. Example: Big Bucks Corporation provides qualified transit passes of $280 per month to their employees. Big Bucks cannot deduct these costs, but the employees can elect to receive up to $280 per month tax-free. Sandy’s tax tip: Although owners of 2 percent or more of the stock of an S corporation can’t receive the full transit pass benefit, they can receive up to $21 of transit pass benefits (by paying the difference, if any) as a de minimis fringe benefit. This may not seem like much, but it’s an extra $21 per month that you can get tax-free. Qualified Parking In addition to qualified transit passes, corporations can provide qualified parking to any employee, as noted earlier subject to the same tax consequences as transit passes. As with transit passes, a company can provide qualified parking up to $260 per month on a tax-free basis if an election is made by the employee. However, no deduction will result to the company providing these passeAgain, this can’t be provided to selfemployed people, independent contractors, or 2 percent or more stockholders in an S corporation. If, however, you are the sole owner of a regular (C) corporation, you can receive this benefit. As you can see, being a regular corporation gives some better fringe benefits to major stockholders and senior officers. However, this has to be compared with the potential savings in Social Security with an S corporation and the other drawbacks to being an S corporation. (See Chapters 9 and 11.) The Bottom Line Transit passes, and free parking are great fringe benefits but their benefit was reduced with the elimination of the deductions. Vanpools have some strict requirements on seating and use by employees. All benefits noted here, however, don’t apply to sole proprietors and 2 percent or more stockholders of S corporations; although the stockholders of an S corporation can have up to $21 of transit passes. C corporations, can have these benefits provided to even the owners and senior officers. Company-Provided Vehicles There seems to be a great misunderstanding about how company-provided vehicles are taxed. This section will clarify most questions that I have received over the years. The general rule is that when a corporation provides a company vehicle, the employee is taxable on the personal use of the vehiclExample: Financial Destiny is a corporation owned by Matt that conducts a multilevel business. The corporation provides Matt with a nice Mercedes and pays all the bills. Assuming that Matt uses the car 75 percent for business, he would be taxed on his personal use of 25 percent. I’ve emphasized throughout this book the importance of keeping a good tax diary or tax organizer or tax tracker. When company cars are provided, keeping a good tax organizer becomes twice as important because it will document how much of the car was used for business and how much was used personally, which is the taxable portion. It’s critical, then, for every employee who receives a company vehicle to meticulously document business versus personal use. This is the easy part of the discussion and the part that most people probably know best. But how do you compute what’s taxable on personal use? There are three methods of calculating the taxable portion of a vehicle based on personal use. These approaches provide very different results. Use the approach that provides the least amount of taxable income if—and this is a big if—you can use the approach. Method One: Annual Lease Value Method This is the general rule that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) wants most companies and employees to usSince the IRS likes it, you probably can guess that it’s the least beneficial to employees because it maximizes the amount of taxable income. In case I didn’t make it clear, if one of the other methods is available to you or your employees, don’t use this method!. For an automobile with a fair market value greater than $59,999, the annual leasevalue is (25 percent × fair market value) + $500. Table for calculating fair annual lease value from IRS Regulation 1.61-21(d)(iii). To use this table, find the fair market value of the vehicle provided, and then use the annual lease value that corresponds with the fair market value times the personal use. If the vehicle is owned, that value is normally the cost of the vehicle plus any taxeThe following example will illustrate this. Example: If Matt’s corporation purchases a BMW for $38,000 (which includes all applicable taxes), the annual lease value would be $10,250. If his personal use were 25 percent, he would record as additional compensation $2,562.50 (25 percent of $10,250). The annual lease method includes insurance and repairs and doesn’t get reduced if the employee pays any part of the insurance or repairs. Thus, if you’re using the annual lease method, don’t have the employee pay the insurance or repairs. Have the corporation pay these. Strangely, however, the annual lease approach does not include gas. If the employer provides the gas, the receiving employee is taxed at 5.5 cents per mile,10which is a very good deal. However, if the employer reimburses an employee for the gas, then the employee is taxed on the full reimbursement. Example: Matt’s corporation pays for the gas on his BMW. Matt normally gets 15 miles to the gallon and pays $4.00 per gallon. If he’s taxed using the annual lease method, he would pay tax at only 5.5 cents per mile (or 82.5 cents per gallon) driven in the U.S. The remaining cost of $3.175 per gallon would not be taxable. Not a bad deal! If, however, Matt gets reimbursed for the gasoline, he would pay tax at the full $4.00 per gallon on any personal mileage. If you’re subject to the annual lease method, have your corporation provide the gas by obtaining a corporate credit or gas card. Method Two: The Cents-per-Mile Method The good news is that this second method results in less tax than the annual lease method. The bad news is that it’s limited to inexpensive cars. 11 To use this method, you must meet the following three criteria:The cost of the vehicle must be no more than $56,100 for passenger vehicles as well as trucks and vans.The company reasonably expects that the vehicle will be driven regularly for its business by the employee, which means that generally more than 50 percent of the mileage must be for business,12 or that it will be used as a commuter highway vehicle, or that the employee will put on at least 10,000 miles and use it for commuting.If the car is provided for less than a year, then all mileage requirements are prorateExample: Lori Ann owns a corporation that she uses for her consulting business. If the corporation provides her with a car for only half the year, all mileage requirements are prorated. Thus, under the usage test, she needs to put on only 5,000 miles. Example: Lori Ann buys a used car for $12,000. As long as she either uses it more than 50 percent for business or regularly commutes in the car and drives it at least 10,000 miles per year, she can use the cents-per-mile method, which uses the current IRS standard mileage rate.. I don’t know what the members of Congress were thinking when they placed a $15,600/$17,600 cost limit on the cents-per-mile method. I guess this method is ideal for cheap cars, such as Daewoo, Kia, or Suzuki, or used cars. In addition, keeping a good tax organizer or diary will establish your 50 percent business usage or that you drove over 10,000 miles. If this isn’t a good enough deal, the cents-per-mile method includes insurance plus repairs and company-provided fuel. Thus anyone who uses this method should not be paying for any of this. Let the corporation pay for all these items.Method Three: The Commuting Value Method This may be the best and cheapest method to be taxed on a company car; since Congress makes the rules, this method is the most limited for owners and officers. The main benefit is that you’re taxed only at a ridiculously cheap flat rate of $1.50 each way for commuting. 14 To use this method, however, you must meet the following four criteria:The company must own the vehicle, not lease it.The employee must use the vehicle for commuting to work.The company must provide in writing that any employee must use it for business and cannot use the vehicle for personal use. (This part is easy.)Except for de minimis use, the employee in fact doesn’t use the car for personal purposes. Here’s the final catch: The employee cannot be a director or officer who earns at least $115,000 for 2022, any employee who earns at least $245,000 for 2022, or a 1 percent or more stockholder. In addition, this method is available only to companyowned cars. Thus, sole proprietorships can’t use this method for the owner but can use it for an employee of the proprietorship. Example: Fred owns a corporation that sells products. If he provides himself with a car, he cannot use the commuting method because he owns more than 1 percent of the stock or more than 1 percent of the ownership of the business. The restriction that’s applicable to 1 percent owners applies to any type of entity, even regular corporations, which is very unusual. The Bottom LineIf your corporation provides you or an employee with a vehicle, it’s vital to maintain a good tax diary showing business usage. This will drastically cut back on what’s taxable to you or the employee.Anyone who receives a corporate-owned or leased car is taxed on the fair market value of the personal use. Business usage is not taxable.The annual lease method is the general way that you would compute the taxable portion of the personal use—and the most expensive method. If you use it, don’t pay for repairs or insurance because they’re included in what is being taxed to you.The cents-per-mile method is great, but it’s available only for cheap cars that cost $15,600 or less or trucks and vans that cost under $17,600. I wonder what most members of Congress are driving these days?The $1.50-per-commute approach is fabulous, but it doesn’t apply to directors, officers who make at least $115,000 for 2021 and $120,000 for 2022, employees who make at least $235,000” for 2021 and $245,000 for 2022, or 1 percent or more stockholders. Thus, you the owner of a self-employed business can’t use this method.A car can be provided on a discriminatory basis. A Cafeteria Plan Can Provide Thousands of Dollars of Tax-Free Benefits How would you like to get a host of fringe benefits for yourself and your employees taxfree by implementing one benefit? You can with what’s known as a cafeteria plan. A cafeteria plan, as its name suggests, allows employees to pick and choose among benefit options. In fact, there must be at least two options to choose froEach employee then chooses specific benefits that he or she wishes to have. There are lots of potential choices; in fact, cafeteria plans can provide the following benefits as choices in the plan:Medical insuranceLong-term care insuranceDisability insuranceGroup term life insuranceDependent-care assistanceQualified pension or profit-sharing planAdoption assistance16Qualified group legal services (Although this isn’t clear, it seems to be allowed in a cafeteria plan. Outside of one, however, these benefits would not be tax-free.)Credits for additional paid vacation weeks Example: You make $50,000 per year from your corporation and have $2,000 in unused credits. If you wish, you can take $1,000 of the credits in cash and an extra week of vacation in addition to the normal two weeks provided by the company. This would result in taxable income of $51,000 and three weeks vacation. Cafeteria plans are almost the ideal benefit. By implementing one benefit, you can offer your employees many benefits that I’ve discussed; thus you will save a lot of time, legal and accounting fees, and money. The only problem, which will be discussed below, is that Congress stupidly limited the cafeteria plan from helping most owners and officers of a business. Because a cafeteria plan generally is available for nonowner employees, many small businesses have not implemented cafeteria plans. I guess the thinking of small-business owners is that “if I can’t benefit, I won’t use it for my employees either.” In 2018, the maximum deferral for employee contributions stood at $2,650. However, up to $500 of unused funds can be carried over the next year’s use. This is different from the older rules for cafeteria plans, which didn’t allow for any carryover of unused funds. Criteria for Bulletproofing This Benefit from the IRS17It generally must be provided to all employees on a nondiscriminatory basis, although you can have a waiting period for eligibility of up to three yearActually, there’s a limited amount of discrimination allowed. You can worry yourself and your accountant about this to see if you meet the various percentage tests. I suggest, however, that you simply cover everyone equally who has at least three years of service and let your accountant live longer.The participants must choose from two or more options.The participants must make a specific election of the benefits they’re choosing and make this election at the beginning of the year or when they start work, whichever comes first.No employee is required to complete more than three years of employment.The cafeteria plan must be in writing and contain specific information about the plan. In other words, you have to notify your employees about all the choices and what they have to do in order to elect various options. You just can’t keep it quiet and hope that they choose nothing. Sorry, that won’t work.The plan cannot discriminate in the benefits provided.Over 25 percent of the total of the nontaxable benefits cannot go to “key employees.” This is a group that comprises: ° Highly compensating employees are those who generally make over $135,000 ° Officers ° Individuals who own more than 5 percent of the stock ° Spouses and dependents of anyone noted above Thus, it’s difficult, but not impossible, to benefit the owners of the business with a cafeteria plan, even if it doesn’t discriminate, unless you earn less than $120,000 in taxable compensation. Example: Happysue Corporation, a corporation formed for the practice of law, provides all employees with credits of up to $10,000. They can use these credits as they like to obtain various benefits, such as medical insurance, pensions, and vacations. If Happysue doesn’t discriminate on the eligibility for this benefit and the owners/key employees receive less than 25 percent of all the actual benefits used, this plan will meet the IRS requirements. The Bottom Line A cafeteria plan is a fabulous plan for rank-and-file employees and even for owners if the corporation doesn’t discriminate and doesn’t provide more than 25 percent of the benefits to the owners or certain key or highly compensated employees. Receipt of Restricted Property and Restricted Stock Tax-Free for Services Rendered Most small businesses are not publicly traded; thus they do not normally provide stock, especially with the securities rules requiring lots of legal work in order to provide stock legally. This would be especially true if one or two people own all the stock because there would be no incentive to giving the owners more stock. However, there are occasions when a company agrees to provide stock or other property to an employee for future services.Generally, employees are taxed when they receive the stock or other property unless there’s a “substantial risk of forfeiture.”19 What this means is that an employee who receives restricted stock is not taxed on it if he or she has to perform future service in order to sell the stock or benefit from it. Taxation ordinarily would occur at the earlier of two dates: when the employee sells the stock or when the risk of forfeiture ends. The employee is taxed at ordinary income rates on the fair market value of the stock at this time. Any appreciation thereafter would be a capital gain. Example: Anita is a staff member of a small advertising consulting corporation, Better Sales or Else, Inc. (otherwise known as BESI). If she receives 100 shares of stock worth $10,000 today but she must work for two years in order to be able to sell it or pledge it for a loan, she’s not taxed on the stock because there’s a substantial risk of forfeiture. She may not work another two years for BESI. If in two years, when the risk of forfeiture ceases, the stock is now worth double, she would be taxed on the whole $20,000 as ordinary income. When you receive restricted stock with a risk of forfeiture, you have the option of paying tax on the stock now. If you do this, you then would report any appreciation in the future as capital gain and not as ordinary incomThis can be a two-edged knife because the stock might depreciate after you paid tax on a higher value. Even worse, you must make this election within 30 days of the date of the transfer of restricted stock. Thus make this election only with a lot of care. Restricted Stock Under the new TCJA, Since 2018, employees may elect28 to defer inclusion of income from restricted stock to a later year. The year that they report income can be deferred to the earliest of: 1. The first date that the qualified stock becomes transferable, or 2. The date that the employee becomes an excluded employee (a 1 percent stockholder or has been the corporation’s chief executive officer or who bears a family relationship to one of these, or was one of the four highest compensated officers of the corporation), or 3. The first date on which any stock of the corporation that issued the qualified stock becomes readily tradable on an established securities market), or 4. The date that’s five years after the first date the employee’s rights in the stock are transferable or aren’t subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture, whichever occurs earlier, or 5. The date on which the employee revokes (at the time and in the manner that IRS provides) the Code Sec. 83(i) election with respect to the stock This extension to a potential five-year deferral of income is based on an election by the employee. This, however, is based on the fact that she or he doesn’t meet one of the exceptions noted above. Phantom Stock Many small businesses want to make employees feel that they own “a piece of the rock.” However, if they give the employees stock, there are all sorts of legal security problems that require heavy legal fees in order to comply with. However, some great tax attorney came up with the concept of phantom stock in order to avoid all these security and legal issues. Phantom stock is simply a promise of a bonus equivalent to either the value of company shares or the increase in that value over a period of time. Phantom stock is treated as if the employees received actual shares in the company. If the stock appreciates in the future, the employees will be paid that appreciation. They might even be eligible to receive dividends. Thus it’s like owning the stock without getting any actual shares. Phantom stock allows employees to participate in the appreciation of their employer’s stock. Phantom stock is taxed much like any other cash bonus, as ordinary income at the time it’s received. Criteria for Bulletproofing This Benefit from the IRS The IRS has stated that employees are not taxed on any phantom stock or appreciation until they actually receive payment, under two conditions:The employer owns and is the beneficiary of any assets or stock that this benefit is based on. 21The stock or assets are subject to the employer’s general creditors. In other words, the corporation keeps any stock in treasury and doesn’t issue it to the employees. Example: I will use my company as an example. The Tax Reduction Institute (TRI) of Germantown, Maryland, wanted to give our staff the feeling that they participate in the growth and benefits of our company. Thus I provided some employees with phantom stock. If there is any sale of the company, or if we go public, any price received above what it would be worth at the time of the grant would go to them. When they receive this benefit, they will pay tax, and TRI will get the deduction. There are two observations about both phantom and restricted stock. First, the stock can be given to anyone, even if the benefit discriminates in favor of officers and highly compensated employees. Second, no deduction accrues to the employer until payment is made on the phantom stock or until the employee is taxed on the restricted stock. The Bottom Line Phantom stock is a greatly underused fringe benefit. It usually makes employees feel as if they are owners (which, in essence, they are) yet doesn’t involve any significant legal fees to provide as with regular stock. It also can be combined with a restriction that the employees must work a certain number of years, thus tying the employee to the company and increasing retention. Qualified Stock Options How would you like to provide your employees with the same incentives as receiving phantom or restricted stock but with the employees taxed only at capital gains rates? This is the major benefit of providing qualified stock options, the most significant benefit that public companies are using for their top management. What Are Stock Options (Calls)? The stock options that we are discussing are not stock. They give the employee the right to purchase the stock at a fixed price over some period of time. Example: Mary has the right for two years to buy company stock for $100 per share. Assuming that the stock goes to $150 per share, Mary has the right to purchase this stock for only $100 per share. This is called exercising the option. The price that she gets to pay ($100) is called the strike price. The option will benefit Mary if the stock appreciates in value. If it decreases in value below the strike price, she won’t exercise the option. Who would pay more for a stock than it’s worth? Tax Consequences The employer gets no deduction on the grant or exercise of these options by the employeSince the corporation gets no deduction on either the grant or the exercise of these options, this is not my favorite benefit for corporations. However, for employees, this is a terrific benefit. When the employee sells the option, as long as he or she has held it for a certain period, to be discussed below, all gain is long-term capital gaiYou may have read about companies that have overstated their earnings in order to boost their stock values. The use of qualified stock options may have been a major factor in this overstatement of earnings because qualified stock options aren’t deductible by the corporation either on grant of the option or on the exercise of the option. Depending on the size of the options, this can cause a substantial overstatement of earnings. Criteria for Bulletproofing This Benefit from the IRS Since there are such great benefits to employees, you probably can guess that Congress has lots of requirements in order to obtain these nice benefits. If you thought this, you made a good assumption. If you don’t do it right, these benefits will be treated as the receipt of any other stock or option and will be taxable to the employee as ordinary income. Thus you must follow everything said in this book to the letter! The following requirements are necessary to obtain all the wonderful tax benefits promised above:24There must be a written plan to offer the option with an option price and a set period of time during which the employee can buy the stock. The plan shouldshow the total number of shares that will be issued and which employees are eligible to receive the options.It must be stock of the employer, the employer’s parent, or a subsidiary of the employer.There must be a formal stockholder approval of the plan, even if all the stock is owned by one person or family within 12 months before or after the plan is adopted.The option must be granted within 10 years of the earlier of two dates—the date the corporation adopts the incentive stock options plan or the date that the shareholders approve the plan. I usually recommend that the option be granted within nine years of the earlier of the two dates in order to avoid any potential problem. Thus, there should never be a mistake.The written plan must provide that the employee must exercise the option within 10 years of the grant of the option. Example: Amy receives an option on December 31, 2018. She must exercise the option by December 30, 2028.The option price must be at the fair market value of the stock at the time of the grant using any reasonable valuation methoExample: Thus, if the stock in a corporation is worth $100 per share based on an appraisal, the employee must pay the strike price of at least $100 per share in order for the options to be deemed qualified stock options.The option can be exercised only by the employee who was given the option. If the recipient dies before exercising the option, his or her estate or the beneficiary named in his or her will can exercise the option. Thus this option cannot be transferred.The employee can’t have owned 10 percent or more of the voting power of the stock at the time the option was granteThus incentive stock options won’t benefit many small corporate owners. It’s for the employees who either don’t already own stock or own less than 10 percent of the stock. Just like most things in life, there are exceptions. A 10 percent or more stockholder can get incentive stock options if the strike price is 110 percent of the fair market value and the option can’t be exercised more than five years from the date of the granThe total value of optioned stock can’t exceed $100,000 per calendar year. Example: Sonia has the right to exercise 1,000 shares at $100 per share. This would fall within the $100,000 limit. If she had the right to exercise 2,000 shares, only 1,000 shares would qualify as incentive stock options. In addition, you have two holding periods to worry about:You must not sell stock for at least two years after the option is granted.You must hold the stock for at least one year after you actually receive the stock. Sandy’s warning: If you don’t hold the stock long enough, you’ll be taxed on the gain as ordinary income when you sell it. Yuck! Take my warning to heart. Whew! I told you that there were all kinds of strict congressional requirements. However, if both the corporation and the employees meet the rules, then the employee really comes out ahead. But if the employee doesn’t hold the stock long enough and therefore makes a sale that disqualifies the option, the proceeds from the sale are considered as ordinary income, and the corporation obtains a deduction. I can almost hear most corporate owners wishing for their employees to make a mistake on the holding period when they sell the stock, so the corporation can obtain a deduction. The Bottom Line Incentive stock options are fabulous for employees in that income from selling them is taxed at the long-term capital gains rate, which is currently only 20 percent, rather than at regular tax rates, which go up to 39.6 percent plus a Medicare surcharge. Tax-Free Lodging Under limited conditions, a company can provide tax-free housing to its employees. This is a great benefit if it’s available to your business. Criteria for Bulletproofing This Benefit from the IRS You can provide lodging and meals to any employee if you meet the following conditions:29The lodging is for the convenience of the employer.The lodging and/or food is provided on the business premises of the company.The lodging must be accepted by the employee as a condition of employment. One of the big issues is, “What does convenience of the employer mean?” This can be proven in a variety of ways. If the employee is on 24-hour call and must be available for duty, this would qualify, or if the employee can’t perform the services unless the lodging is furnished, this would qualifExample: A prison guard is required to live on the premises in accommodations supplied by the government. The guard must be available if there’s a prison riot or break. The lodging can be provided tax-free. Example: James and Sheila accept a position as managers of a bed-and-breakfast facility. Their job is to manage the facility, supervise the housekeeping to ensure clean rooms, and provide breakfast for guests. They’re required to stay in the facility and handle emergencies. Their lodging and food would be tax-free.In order to have the meals and/or lodging tax-free, the employer must pay for them and provide them directlDo not have the company reimburse for any meals or lodging. Exclusion for Meals As you might expect, the exclusion for meals alone is a bit easier; meals only have to be provided for the convenience of the employer and furnished for a noncompensatory business reasoThere are a number of situations where employers can provide taxfree meals. In fact, most small businesses will be able to use this benefit very much. The following are some illustrative examples of situations in which your company can provide tax-free meals to employees: Short business meal during working hourA corporation can provide meals to employees during working hours if there’s a required short lunch period, which is usually less than 45 minutes. However, there’s a catch: The employees cannot eat elsewhere in the short time allowed for lunch. Example: Many times my staff is required to break for lunch no longer than 30 minutes because of the number of customers calling at lunchtime. We normally could furnish meals tax-free to my staff even though there’s a Burger King near us. (Who doesn’t have a Burger King or McDonald’s near them?) The reason is that there’s little chance that my staff would be able to stand in line, get their meals, and then eat within the short break. Thus we could furnish employees lunch on these crunch days tax-free. Example: Alice, John, and Mary work for a Sockittotheirs, Inc. The office is located on the East Coast. During lunch, usually around 12 p.m., many customers from the West Coast call up the company. Because there’s a great deal of work during the lunch periods every day, the company can provide free meals. Meals furnished for employees who are required to live on premises. If an employee can be provided tax-free lodging, as discussed earlier, because he or she is required to live on the company premises as a condition of the job, the company also can provide tax-free meals as part of the deaMeals furnished to restaurant employees are almost always tax-free, whether furnished before, during, or after their shifIt amazes me that more restaurants aren’t using this benefit more often. It would be a great tax-free fringe benefit and a great way to retain employees. Meals can be furnished tax-free if the employee is available for emergency calls during his or her lunch period. Thus, if the company provides an employee with meals at his or her desk in order to field calls that come in during lunch, these meals are tax-freTo receive this tax-free benefit, the employee can’t perform personal errands during the lunch period.Example: A medical corporation provides lunch for all staff members and the doctors because emergencies occur during the day, and the corporation wants the staff available for these problems. Lunch can be provided tax-free. Meals can be furnished if there are insufficient eating facilities near the workplacIf employees have few or no facilities for lunch within a reasonable distance of work, the company can provide meals. It certainly will be important to show that you’ve checked the Yellow Pages for eating facilities in the area and made estimates on how long it would take to get to and from any facility and to eat lunch there. Meals furnished to over 50 percent of all employees will be tax-free. This is a great way for any company to provide meals tax-free. As long as the company furnishes the meals on the premises to over 50 percent of all employees, the meals are tax-freExample: A hospital provides 210 staff members out of the total 230 staff members and doctors with free meals. Supposedly it’s to keep them available for emergencies, but these emergencies rarely occur. However, because the hospital provides free meals to more than half the employees, all meals provided are tax-free to the stafExample: We at the Tax Reduction Institute provide a free lunch once a month and discuss business over lunch. Since we provide lunch to more than half the employees, all meals are tax-free, even to me. Lunch conferences are deductible, even outside the company premises and even if only to senior officerThere is one important case that you’ll like. A company provided daily lunches for its officers where attendance was compulsory. The lunches were in a hotel conference room rented by the corporation. The officers discussed daily events and any upcoming activities necessary for the day and shared their experiences. The tax court allowed the corporation to provide tax-free meals even though it was done off the company premises and was done daily. You should notice that meals, especially for good business reasons, can be furnished to officers and directors on a discriminatory basis. Other Interesting Exceptions for Meals There was an interesting case that may provide a lot of small-business owners with taxfree meals and company provided housing, F. R. McDowelIt involved a husband and a wife who were the sole owners of a large farm, which was leased to a corporation owned by McDowell’s children. Thus the only business that the McDowells’ corporation had was to lease out the land. The tenant, the children’s corporation, was engaged in ranching operations and was required to keep the buildings and other improvements in good condition. McDowell retained the right to inspect the property. McDowell actually lived on the land through most of the year and made daily inspections of the leased land. The tax court held that the meals and lodging furnished by the corporation to the McDowells were tax-free.What does this mean to you? This case has many implications. Here are some examples of how you may use this case to your advantage. Example: Tiffany is an antique dealer. She runs her business out of her home using a corporation. She’s required to work out of her home and to provide security for the antiques. She receives phone calls at home from potential customers and past customers. Tiffany may have her corporation provide housing and meals for her business. Although there is no case on this, I wonder what would happen in this hypothetical situation. A network marketing professional runs her network marketing business out of her home using a corporation. At her home she gets calls daily from distributors and from customers. She meets with her distributors at least weekly and stores inventory and marketing materials in her home. Her corporation provides that she must be available to handle all calls on a 24-hour basis. It would appear that, based on the McDowell case, she might be able to receive corporate meals and lodging tax-free. Let me warn you, however, that there is no case on this. Thus this benefit may need to be tested in the courts. This would work only for network marketers and other homebased business owners who are incorporated. It will not work for the owners of a sole proprietorship. Finally, meal expenses incurred for the convenience of the employer are normally 50 percent deductible under the TCJA. Qualified Pension and Profit-Sharing Plans Without question, this may be the most important fringe benefit that you can provide. It not only allows a large deduction but also can provide a great deal of legal protection against lawsuits because some qualified plans are exempt from creditors. Everyone should be stashing away at least 10 percent of what they make for retirement. Having a qualified plan is a great way for most people to achieve their retirement goals. There are wide varieties of plans; in fact, I could also write a book on just this one topic. However, to keep this topic manageable, I want to discuss the most popular and most recommended plans among small businesses today. Profit-Sharing Plan This plan allows you to put away in any business for any employee up to 25 percent of his or her wages or, if you’re self-employed, up to 25 percent of the net income of the company. There’s a maximum contribution of $61,000 for 2022 per employeWhat’s great about a profit-sharing plan is its flexibility: The amount of an employee’s wages that you can contribute can vary from year to year. Thus, if you want to contribute 25 percent of all wages to the plan in one year but only 10 percent in a less profitable year, you can do so. Thus flexibility is the name of the game with profit-sharing plans. I would unqualifiedly recommend this plan to all business owners. However, there are some drawbacks to this plan. First, it’s nondiscriminatory. You generally must cover all full-time employees. You can have a three-year waiting period before coverage, but all employees must be covered under the plan. Second, as with most qualified plans, these are expensive to set up and require filing expensive forms with the IRS, thus enriching your accountant. Despite the disadvantages of a profit-sharing plan, I like them a lot, especially because of their tremendous flexibility. This is one plan that you should consider. Simplified Employee Pension (SEP) Plan In many ways, this plan is similar to a profit-sharing plan. It allows you to contribute up to 25 percent of your net income if you’re self-employed or 25 percent of an employee’s wages. Again, this plan has a maximum contribution limit of $61,000 for 2022. As with a profit-sharing plan, a company can vary its contribution from year to year. Thus a company can contribute up to 25 percent of wages this year and much less or even nothing next year. It thus has the same flexibility as profit-sharing plans. However, a SEP has some benefits over a profit-sharing plan. First, SEPs are inexpensive to set up. You simply fill out IRS Form 5305-SEP, but you don’t file it with the IRS; you keep the form with the company records. Second, there are no complex annual filings as with other qualified plans, so administrative expenses are very low. A SEP plan, however, has the same drawbacks as a profit-sharing plan in that it is nondiscriminatory. I love SEPs. If you have few or no employees, a simplified employee pension is the way to go. This also can be used by sole proprietorships. Defined-Benefit Plan This is a very different type of qualified plan. Most plans require you to contribute a set percentage of wages. A defined-benefit plan uses an actuary to compute how much you or your employees may contribute in order to get a set retirement income. Thus you figure out how much you need at retirement and, in effect, work backward. Because of this, a defined-benefit plan normally allows you to contribute much more than other plans, especially if the worker is 50 years of age or older. Since the older the worker, the less time there is available to build up to the desired goal, older workers can contribute much more than younger workers. The maximum yearly contribution to the definedbenefit plan is a whopping $245,000 in 2022. With this wonderfully high contribution limit, you would think that I would be wholeheartedly recommending this plan. However, this is not the case because this plan has two major drawbacks. First, a defined-benefit plan is the most administratively expensive plan available. You need not only a good accountant to file some complicated forms but also a yearly actuary to design contributions each year. Second, if this isn’t bad enough, there’s very little flexibility to this plan. You must contribute a set amount each year, as determined by the actuary, regardless of profitability. Given their lack of flexibility, I normally don’t recommend defined-benefit plans. A defined-benefit plan is ideal for older owners who are 50 years of age or older and for firms that have net incomes that don’t decrease significantly from year to year. SIMPLE IRAs In many ways, this is my favorite plan, especially if you have employees. This also works for all sole proprietorships and even for the owner of the proprietorship. A Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees (SIMPLE) IRA is like a traditional IRA, except that with an IRA, you can contribute up to 100 percent of your wages, with a maximum contribution of $14,000 in 2022. If you are 50 or over, you get to contribute an extra $3,000 catch-up contribution. What is so different and beneficial about a SIMPLE IRA is that the employee, and not the employer, makes most of the contributions. The employer need only match an employee contribution if the employee makes a contribution for the year. A SIMPLE IRA allows an employee to contribute up to $14,000 in 2022. In addition, the employer need only match the employee’s contribution, if any, up to 3 percent of their wages, up to a maximum of $290,000 for 2022. This means that the maximum employer contribution would be $8,700 in 2022. Example: Stitchem, a medical corporation, provides a SIMPLE IRA for all its employees and doctors. If the doctors contribute the maximum amount of $14,000 in 2022, Stitchem may contribute up to 3 percent of the doctors’ wages, up to another $8,700, for a total contribution of $22,700. Not a bad deal! The doctors get $22,700 put away for them because they contribute $14,000, and the corporation contributes $8,700 (3 percent up to $290,000 in earnings). Example: Sarah is a receptionist for Stitchem and earns $25,000. If Sarah makes no contributions to the SIMPLE IRA, Stitchem need not make any contributions on behalf of Sarah. Example: Let’s assume that Sarah contributes $2,000 to the SIMPLE IRA. Stitchem would have to match Sarah’s contribution, but only up to 3 percent of her wages. Thus, since she earns $25,000, Stitchem would contribute only $750 for Sarah. Many medical and legal firms set up SEPs or profit-sharing plans because they allow a much greater contribution, $61,000 in 2022. However, if there are other employees, this can be very expensive. If there are several employees, I recommend considering setting up a SIMPLE IRA. The overall contribution by the owner may be less than with a SEP, but the benefit of not contributing as much for employees may greatly offset this. If, however, a company wants to contribute as much as possible on behalf of employees, a SEP may be the better choice. Workers who are age 50 or older by December 31 can put away an additional catch-up contribution of $3,000 in their simple IRA. Thus, the maximum contribution for someone age 50 or older would be $17,000 plus 3 percent of their wages. The Four Most Overlooked Real Estate Tax Deductions in America Unquestionably, there is progress. The average American now pays out almost as much in taxes as he formerly got in wages. —H. L. Mencken What’s the Point of BMortgage Points? uying homes in America is as American as apple pie. Everyone seems to be getting into the act. In fact, in June 2002, President Bush even proposed broad incentives that would enable more Americans1than ever before to purchase their own homes. Although everyone dreams of owning his or her own personal “piece of the rock” to call home, there are some stiff expenses involved in buying a home. One big, misunderstood, and often overlooked expense deals with points. Points, otherwise known as loan origination fees or loan processing fees, are normally incurred when you obtain a loan at Chapter OverviewLearn about when you should deduct all mortgage points paid to banks.Understand a real estate deduction most often overlooked: unamortized points.Learn why making repairs in investment property is much better than making improvements.Learn why making improvements on a principal residence is much more important than making repairs.Learn how to IRS-bulletproof your designation of repairs or improvements.Understand the new universal exclusion that allows you to avoid up to $500,000 of gain.Learn about new untapped markets where you should be buying because of the universal exclusion. (This is a killer.)221a set interest rate. Many times, paying more in the form of “upfront” points results in a lower interest rate than if no points are paid. You can tell how many points you paid by looking at your settlement statement. It will note exactly how much your points are. In general, points are a percentage of your loan. Thus, if you have a $100,000 loan and pay two points, you would pay 2 percent of the loan in points, which would be $2,000. Rules for IRS-Bulletproofing Deduction of Your Points The good news is that you may fully deduct all points paid in the year that you pay them, even if they are paid out of the loan proceeds and even if they are VA or FHA points, provided you meet five conditions:2You use them to either purchase or improve your principal residence; thus, you can’t fully deduct points incurred for a second home, a rental property, or refinancing a home. (We’ll discuss this below.)Your down payment exceeds the charge for the points.Your principal home fully secures your loan. In other words, your home is collateral for the loan.Charging points is a normal, established practice in your area.The points charged are not excessive. This means that they do not exceed the usual charge for points in your area. Example: John and Mary purchase their main home for $250,000. They make a down payment of $50,000. In order to get their 6 percent loan, they have to pay two points, $5,000. They may deduct the full $5,000 on their tax return as interest. It would be reported on Schedule A, Itemized Deductions. Many people overlook this deduction because the bank doesn’t send any information forms. You just have to recognize it on your settlement statement and know that these points are deductible. If you’ve purchased a home within the last three years, check out your settlement statement. If you didn’t deduct the points, you can file both federal and amended returns for up to three open tax years. Moreover, the IRS used to require that people pay the points separately, using a separate check, in order to deduct the points. Recently, the IRS yielded on this requirement and now allows you to deduct points even if you did not pay the points in cash or use a separate check. In fact, you can have the points paid from the loan proceedHowever, and this is the catch, you can claim the deduction only if the money that you bring to the settlement (down payment, recording fees, etc.) exceeds the charge for points. Example: Jack and Jill incur $5,000 in points to purchase their lovely house on the hill. These points are to be paid from the loan. If Jack and Jill want to deduct the .(Cont.)Learn why it’s a tragic tax mistake to purchase the family’s home as part of a divorce (which, sadly, is done all the time). $5,000, they must make a down payment of at least $5,000 at the closing. If they pay only $3,000 down, then only $3,000 of the points would be immediately deductible. I wonder if the people at the IRS are actually developing a heart .. Nah! Points Paid by the Seller Sometimes a seller agrees to pay points. This often happens when the contract provides that the loan points be split between buyer and seller. The tax consequences are great. The seller treats these payments as selling expenses and you, the buyer, get to deduct the points paid by both you and the seller as interest, as long as you reduce your purchase basis by the seller’s payment of the pointIsn’t this a great country? Example: Bob purchases a home with a $100,000 loan. Bob has to pay two points ($2,000) for this loan. The real estate contract provides that Bob and the seller will split the points. Even though Bob pays only $1,000 in points himself, he may deduct the entire $2,000 of points paid. He must, however, reduce his basis in his home by the $1,000 paid by the seller. Amortize All Other Points Paid As I noted above, you can deduct the points paid only if you meet certain specific conditions, such as incurring them for the purchase of a principal residence. If you don’t meet these specific conditions, you can’t immediately deduct all the points. This can occur in many situations. You can incur points to buy investment property or a second home or to refinance a loan rather than using the loan proceeds to purchase or improve the home. In these cases, you cannot deduct the points immediately; you must amortize the points over the life of the loan. This means, in plain English, that you must deduct the points ratably over the number of months of the loan. The following example will explain this. Example: Howard refinances his home and pays $3,600 for a 15-year loan (180 months). Since this loan is not used to purchase or improve his principal residence, he may not immediately deduct all the points. He must write them off over the life of the loan. Thus, the loan is for 180 months, he would deduct $20 per month or $240 per year. The main question, which applies to almost everyone, is what happens if you don’t hold the house for the full loan term or keep the loan for the full term of the loan? The answer is that you get to deduct all unamortized points in the year that you either sell your home or refinance the loan that you incurred points on. Example: Let’s assume that, in the above example, after you deduct only $240 of the $3,600 of points paid, you refinance your loan. You would deduct the remaining, undeducted portion of the points—$3,360 in unamortized points! From my many years of experience in taxes, I’ve found that almost everyone fails to notice this major deduction and, of course, to take it on their tax returns. Why? Most people don’t know about it and their banks don’t send them any notice about this. Also, it requires that you or your accountant check the settlement statement that you received when you purchased the property or incurred the loan to find the amount of the points, which most people forget about because of the time that’s passed since the closing. If you’ve sold your home or refinanced a loan within the last three years, check whether you have any unamortized points. If so, you can file an amended tax return (Form 1040X) for up to the last three years and claim the deduction. Even better, many states allow you to claim this deduction in computing state taxes, too. Repairs vs. Improvements: Which Is Better? The second most overlooked real estate deduction deals with the difference between improvements and repairs. When should you try to make an improvement and when should you try to make repairs? At first, they seem similar, but learning to classify and structure them correctly can result in thousands of dollars of extra benefits to you. Much of the answer is a question of facts; however, how you present and structure the facts can result in two entirely separate tax results. I should note that this issue is even tough for the IRS; the agency’s internal manual states that “it is a difficult issue requiring maximum use of judgment.”5 The key is that, with rental and commercial properties, you always prefer to have fix-ups classified as repairs and not as improvements. The reason is that repairs are deductible now, while improvements on rental property are capital items that must be depreciated over a recovery period of 27.5 years for residential rental property and 39 years for commercial propertWhat would you rather have, a deduction now or over many years? Example: Dan spends $10,000 fixing up his residential rental property. He can deduct the $10,000 now as a repair or take deductions of $364 per year for 27.5 years if he classifies it as an improvement. But the $364 per year is not really $364 in today’s dollars. We must consider the time value of money. If the time value of money is 6 percent, the $364 per year improvement deductions for 27.5 years are worth $4,840 in today’s dollars, compared with the $10,000 repair deduction. To put it another way, a repair deduction is twice as valuable as an improvement. With your residence homes, in contrast with rental or commercial properties, you have a different attitude. Any repair made to a residence is completely nondeductible. You don’t get to add it to your basis and you don’t get a deduction—nothing, nada, zip! Improvements, on the other hand, get added to the basis of the home and help reduce the gain, if any, when you sell the home. So, with a residence, you want improvements and not repairs. When is a fix-up a repair and when is it an improvement? That’s the big question. To repair means to restore to a sound state or to mend. You make a repair to keep the property in ordinary, efficient operating condition. It does not add to the value of the property or appreciably prolong its lifRepairs merely keep the property usable and operating over its probable life.8Improvements make the property better in some way. You make improvements when you do one or more of the following:You increase the value of the property.9You make the property last much longeYou adapt the property to a new or different use. When does fixing up a roof cease to be a repair and become a partial replacement (improvement)? In situations of this sort, careful tax planning, careful understanding of what’s in this book, and complete records can yield big tax savings. Fortunately, there is a great but little known case from back in 1983 that will show you what to do in order to get the right classification for your propertRoger Jacobson bought a four-unit apartment for $30,000. It had one tenant, but the building was in poor shape. Jacobson spent $6,247 to have a contractor do the following:Remove tree limbs that were rubbing on the roofRepair water damageClean the carpet, floors, and exteriorRepair the cracked front porchInstall new cabinet doorsInstall new countertops Although the IRS tried to classify all the work as improvements, the tax court allowed $5,000 as a repair deduction. The only improvements were the new cabinet doors and new countertops. In siding with Jacobson, the court noted that:There was a tenant in residence, whose presence meant that the property was commercially active.$6,247 in total and the $5,000 allowed were not material based on the $30,000 building price.Most items were fixed using the same or similar materials. The word “new” signals improvements and not replacement or repaiEight Great Strategies to Ensure Repairs Based on the Jacobson case, here are eight great strategies that could ensure that you get the classification that you want. 1. Segregate repairs from improvements. If you’re going to renovate the place, but also make certain repairs, you must segregate the repairs from the improvements to deduct the repairIn fact, the IRS says in its audit manual that fix-ups that would be a repair when made separately would be an improvement when made as part of a general overhaul of the buildinExample: Karen wants to fix up her rental property. Unfortunately she both needs a new roof, which would be an improvement, and needs to clean out and fix the clogged gutters, which are repairs. If she does it all in one job and gets one combined bill, the entire project would be considered an improvement that would be depreciable over27.5 years. She should get an itemized bill for the roof and a separate bill for the gutter work. The gutter work would be deductible as a repair. Make sure repairs are not part of an overall plan and, if possible, have repairs done by a different contractor. Certainly, you should get a separate bill for the repair work. 2. Fix a minor portion only. If you’re replacing an entire wall, roof, or floor, you’re often making an improvemenIf you repair only part of a wall, roof, or floor, you’re generally making repair3. Use similar, comparable, or less expensive materials. If your purpose is to mend and restore to a sound state, you should use comparable materialIf your purpose is to improve, you use better-quality or improved materialExample: If, in the above example, Karen fixed her ducts with much better materials, she would have an improvement rather than a repair. 4. Fix damaged areas only. If you repair, you replace or restore worn-out, broken, or deteriorated areas of the propertWhen you expand your repair to areas of the property that are not worn out, broken, or deteriorated, you make an improvement. Example: Mark has an air conditioner that suddenly stops working. If he fixes only the compressor, it’s a repair. If he puts in a whole new unit, it’s an improvement. Example: Marcia has a leak in her roof. If she needs to replace only half the roof to fix the repair and she uses similar materials, this would be a repair. If she puts on a whole new roof or uses better materials, such as slate instead of shingles, this would be an improvement. 5. Repair after an event. Generally, you think out an improvement in advancWith a repair, something happens that calls your attention to the need for the fix-uA broken water pipe requires repair. Wear and tear produces a need to repaint. Events made it necessary to repair the pipe and paint the building. Example: Your floor is damaged. If you resurface it, it would be a repair. Example: Your building is sinking because of the subsoil. If you shore up the building and replace a good portion of the floor because of this problem, you would probably have a repair. If you put in more than is required, such as a new wood floor to replace linoleum, you would have an improvement. With rental properties, many times repairs occur as a result of calls by tenants. You should document that a tenant called you in order to fix a problem. You can put your tax diary or organizer to good use here. 6. Repair during occupancy or between tenants. The IRS audit manual says that people may buy a property, renovate it, and then try to expense the cost instead of treating these expenses as rightful improvementThe IRS tells its agents to watch for such situations and propose adjustments. You avoid a lot of scrutiny when you own the property for a time before making repairs. Also, you have a much stronger argument for repairs when you have tenants in place when you make the repairs. 7. Classify the fix-up as a repair (or improvement) on your books. The bean counters should put the beans in the right spot. If you classify them as improvements on your books, the IRS will use this against you. 8. Try to replace less than half of any wall, ceiling, or floor. If you put in a whole new wall, this would be an improvement; however, if you fix part of the wall, this would probably be deemed a repair. Your best proof may be a photograph. Take pictures before and after. If they look alike, that suggests a repair. Make sure you get a date stamp on the prints. Many digital cameras will date-stamp the photos too. The bottom line: A combination of good planning and good records of proof— such as tenants calls, photos, separate bills for repairs and improvements—is critical toward getting the repair deductions that you want. If you want your fix-ups to be deemed improvements, as with your residence, you would do the opposite of what’s recommended here. Remember: for rental properties, repairs are best, because they give a deduction now. For your home, you want improvements, because they’re added to your basis. Repairs give you nothing. As you can see, there are a few factors that must be considered as to whether a fixup is a deductible repair or capitalized as an improvement. This sometimes makes it difficult to determine whether an expenditure is a repair vs. an improvement. Fortunately, landlords may use three “safe harbor” rules to bypass the repairimprovement conundrum and deduct many expenses regardless of whether they should be classified as improvements or repairs under the IRS regulations. These are:231.Safe harbor for small taxpayers Routine maintenance safe harbor De minimis safe harbor Safe harbor for small taxpayers (SHST): The Safe Harbor for Small Taxpayers allows landlords to deduct fix-up expenses as a repair IF your building costs $1,000,000 or less. The amount of the deduction is the LESSER of: a. $10,000 or b. Two percent of the unadjusted basis of the building In addition, to qualify for this, a taxpayer must have average annual gross receipts of $10 million or less for the three preceding taxable years. Even better, this $1,000,000 qualification limit applies on a building-bybuilding basis. Example: Sam buys a home used as a rental investment property for $700,000. If he incurs $6,000 in fix-up expenses, he can deduct the full $6,000 amount, even if it would normally have been considered an improvement under the criterianoted above, since the fix-up costs were less than the $10,000 threshold. Likewise, if he owned a dozen buildings that cost about the same price, he can take advantage of the SHST for each building. This is a nice small taxpayers’ exception that I would bet many of you didn’t know about. 2. Routine Maintenance Safe Harbor: Expenses that qualify for the routine maintenance safe harbor exception are automatically deductible in a single year, even if they would otherwise qualify as improvements that ordinarily must be depreciated over several years. Routine maintenance consists of recurring work a building owner does to keep an entire building, or each system in a building, in ordinarily efficient operating condition. It includes:Inspection, cleaning, and testing of the building structure and/or each building system Replacement of damaged or worn parts with comparable and commercially available replacement parts Routine maintenance can be performed and deducted under this safe harbor exception any time during the property’s useful life. However, building maintenance qualifies for the routine maintenance safe harbor exception ONLY if, when you placed the building or building system into service, you reasonably expected to perform such maintenance more often than once every 10 years. Moreover, this safe harbor exception may not be used for expenses for betterments or restorations of buildings or other business properties in a state of disrepair. Thus, if you buy a building and immediately fix up items that were in disrepair, this exception won’t qualify. To take advantage of any of these safe harbor rules, there is an easy election that you will need to make on your tax return. See your tax professional for assistanc3. De minimus Safe Harbor (DMSH): If you don’t qualify for the safe harbor for small business exception, you could qualify for the De minimus safe harbor exception. Here, you can deduct all fix-up expenses on a building if they are less than $2,500 (as shown on the invoice). Also, if you get certified financial statements, this number is bumped up to $5,000. It can apply to any fix-up on the real estate or even the purchase of personal property on the real estate. Thus, if you bought a new garage door or refrigerator that costs less than $2,500, you can write it off under this exception. The Universal Appeal of the Universal Exclusion Prior to 1997, you were able to exclude up to $125,000 of gain on the sale of your principal residence if you were 55 or older. However, this discriminated against most of the population and it involved some complex requirements to obtain this exclusion. Many people felt this was unfair. To simplify the law dealing with residences, Congress passed a terrific law in 1997.24Requirements Needed to Audit-Proof the Universal Exclusion The general rule is that you may exclude up to $250,000 of gain from the sale of your principal residence ($500,000 if married filing jointly, which will be discussed below) if you meet the following requirements:25You owned the residence for any two of the last five years.You occupied your residence for any two of the last five years.You haven’t used the exclusion within the last two years. As you can see, you can’t have used the exclusion within the last two years. However, this also means that you can use the exclusion every two years! Example: Tony sells his home for a $200,000 gain and uses the exclusion. He then moves into his summer home in Hyannis and lives there for two years. After the two years, he sells his second home. He may use the exclusion again. You can use the exclusion with every home that you own, by simply moving into it and making the home your new principal residence. You would live in it for two years and then sell the home and take the exclusion. Thus, you can avoid all or most of your gains on every home that you own. Isn’t life great? If you’re married and filing a joint return, you may exclude up to $500,000 of gain if you meet these three requirements:26You or your spouse have owned the residence for at least two out of the last five years.Both you and your spouse have used the house as your principal residence for two out of the last five years.Neither spouse is ineligible because of using the exclusion within the last two years. Ownership vs. Residence Test The two-years-out-of-five requirement is applied strictly, with some exceptions, to be discussed below. To use the $250,000/$500,000 exclusion, either you or your spouse must have owned the residence and used it as your principal residence for any two out of the last five yearThe key, however, is that the ownership period may differ from your use period, as long as you satisfy both tests within the previous five-year window. Like the prior law, the two years need not be consecutivYou can even count short absences for vacations as periods of use even if you rent out the homExample: Matt and Lisa rent and live in a home in year 1. In year 2, they purchase the home and live in it until the end of the year. In year 3, they move out and rent the home to Smith until the end of year 5, when they sell the home. They have owned the home for two out of five years (years 2, 3, and 4) and used it as their principal residence for two out of the last five years (years 1 and 2), so they qualify for the exclusion. Even if you are living apart from your spouse and file jointly, each of you can claim the $250,000 exclusion for your individual residences if you meet the ownership and use ruleExample: Bill and Hillary file jointly, but live in different homes. They have each met the two-year ownership and use requirements for their respective homes. Each may avoid up to $250,000 of gain on the sale of each of their homes. The general rule is that you can use the exclusion once every two years. Thus, if you use the exclusion less than two years ago, you must wait until the two-year period has passeHowever, remember my favorite saying: “Where there’s a will, there’s a lawyer.” There are several exceptions to both the two-year ownership rule and the use rule. If you or someone in your family becomes physically or mentally incapable of self-care,32 you are deemed to meet both the ownership and use requirements if you’ve owned and used the home for only one year out of the last five years. Example: Myra has been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. She lived in her home for one and a half years before she needed to be put into a nursing home for proper care. Despite the fact that she owned and used her residence for less than two years, she will be deemed to meet the ownership and use requirements for the full $250,000 exclusion if her home is sold. You can even be exempt from all of the two-year ruleCongress specifically allows some leeway to use the exclusion even if you fail the two-year ownership requirement or the two-year use requirement or you’ve used the exclusion within the last two years. To avoid all these rules, your sale or exchange must be for one of the following reasons:Change in place of employmentHealthOther unforeseen circumstances as provided by the IRS Example: Warren was told by his doctor to move to a warm climate because of his asthma. If he moves to Arizona after living in his principal residence for only one year, he may still use part of the exclusion. The two-year ownership and use requirements are waived. Example: Karen had lived in her home for just one year when her firm transferred her to another city. She moves because of this job change. Despite living in the home for only one year, she may still use part of the exclusion. As found in much tax legislation, what Congress giveth, it taketh away. If any of the two-year requirements are waived due to hardship, but you still don’t quite meet one or both of the other requirements, the amount of the exclusion is calculated according to percentage of the months out of 24 that you met the rules. Let’s take an example to explain this. Example: Sarah sells her home because she gets a new job in another town. She has not used the exclusion in the last two years and has lived in the home for only six months. If she had both owned and occupied the home for the full two years, she would be able to exclude up to $250,000 of gain. However, since she lived in the house for only six months out of the required 24, by reason of her change in employment, she can exclude only 25 percent of the potential $250,000, so she pays taxes on $187,500 of gain. If she didn’t meet the hardship exception, she would have to pay tax on the whole gain. Even though she doesn’t get to use the whole $250,000 exclusion, she still avoids taxes on $62,500 of the gain. IRS “Gotchas” with Prior Depreciation As I’ve noted, you can rent out your home or conduct business in part of the home and still qualify for the exclusion. However, there’s something that you should know about depreciation taken on your home. If you’ve taken any depreciation on your home after May 6, 1997, any gain up to that amount of depreciation will be taxable at your normal rates, up to a maximum of a special long-term capital gain rate of 25 percent, as long as you have owned the property for at least one yeaExample: Samantha sells her home in 2008 for a $200,000 gain. She used her home as a home office and claimed depreciation on part of her home. If the depreciation taken after May 6, 1997 was $5,000, Samantha must pay tax on the $5,000 at the rate of 25 percent. If Samantha had held the property for less than 12 months, the tax rate on this depreciation would be at her ordinary income tax rates. Frankly, I don’t consider this payback of the allowable depreciation to be a problem. If you were in the 36 percent tax bracket when you took the depreciation, but you have to pay back the depreciation at only the 25 percent maximum rate, you’re still coming out way ahead by taking any allowable depreciation. Pro Rata Benefit of Exclusion for Prior Use of Home as Commercial or Rental Property For sales after 2008, the home sale exclusion will be reduced proportionately for the period of time that the home wasn’t used as a principal residence. Example: In 2008–2009, Sam had a second home in Florida. If Sam were to sell his principal residence in January 2011 and move into the second home for two years before selling the second home, 50 percent of the gain qualifies for the exclusion. The period of time that the home was used as a second home (after 2008) precludes the universal exclusion from applying to those years (see #4 below). Other Rules to Know 1. No retroactivity. No improper use prior to 2009 exists. Thus, if you use your second home as a vacation or rental property prior to 2009, it won’t count against you. 2. Temporary absences don’t count against you. If you are away for a temporary absence, not to exceed two years, due to health, employment changes, or certain unforeseen circumstances, those years will still qualify.3. Qualified military. Ten years of absence for a qualifying member of the military (and certain government employees) won’t result in disqualifying use. 4. Disqualifying use after your home was a principal residence. You might wonder, “What if I have a hard time selling my home and need to rent it out? Will that result in disqualifying use?” The answer is that Congress is giving you a break. You can rent out the house that was your principal residence first and not result in disqualifying use if it occurs: a. Within the last five years preceding the sale, AND b. You permanently stop using the house as your main home. Example: In 2009, Alice rents out her principal residence for two years. If she sells the home afterwards, she would meet the requirements and the full gain would be allowed toward the exclusion. If spouses who file jointly move into the rental property, they can exclude up to $500,000 of gain. Transfers of Property as Part of a Divorce One of the most overlooked real estate tax traps affects millions of Americans yearly as a result of divorces. If you sell your home to your ex-spouse as part of the divorce, his or her basis in the home is equal to the old joint basis and any gain or loss is measured against this old basis. Any payments your ex-spouse makes do not increase that basiThe following example will illustrate this disastrous problem. Example: Marc sells his share of his home to his ex-wife for $300,000 as part of the divorce. If they paid $40,000 for the house 10 years ago, her basis for gain or loss remains at $40,000. She gets no benefit from the $300,000 payment. Thus, if she sells the home for $600,000, she would have to pay tax on the entire $560,000 gain (less the $250,000 universal exclusion). Thus, she gets hit twice: when she pays $300,000 to buy her ex-husband’s share of the house and the second time when she sells the house and must pay tax on all the gain above the original basis. Yuck! In a divorce situation, neither spouse should purchase the house. Instead, the home should be sold to a third person. Each spouse can then buy a new home with his or her share of the tax-free money! For more tax planning involving real estate, see Sandy’s book Real Estate Tax Secrets of the Rich. Deduct all points incurred in purchasing and improving your principal residence.If you’re going to finance the points, make sure that your down payment at leastequals the amount of the points.If you pay points for any purposes other than to purchase and improve your home (such as to refinance a loan or to purchase a second home), amortize the points over the life of the loan.Any points paid by the seller are deductible by the buyer!Deduct all unamortized points when the loan is refinanced or when the property is sold.Try to structure all fix-up expenses on rental property as repairs rather than improvements.Try to structure all fix-up expenses on residences as improvements rather than repairs.To qualify for a repair, do the following: – Segregate repairs from improvements in the bill. – Fix minor areas only. Don’t replace a whole wall or roof. – Use similar, comparable, or less expensive materials. – Fix damaged areas only. – Repair after an event or after a tenant complains about a problem. – Make repairs during occupancy or in between tenants. – Classify the fix-up as a repair (or improvement) on your books. – Try to replace less than half of any wall, ceiling, or floor.Take advantage of the safe harbor election to be able to expense fix-ups under $2,500 per invoice or the much higher $5,000 per invoice (if you receive audited financial statements), which I don’t think would apply to most of you reading this.Take advantage of the universal exclusion when selling your principal residence. Follow these three rules for the exclusion: – Own your residence for any two of the last five years. – Use your home as your principal residence for any two of the last five years. – Wait at least two years before you use the exclusion again. (Note: if you’re married filing jointly, both you and your spouse must use the house as a principal residence for two out of the last five years.)The two years of ownership and the two years of usage don’t have to be the same two out of five years.There’s a partial exclusion from the rules if you sell your home as a result of a change in employment, health, or other unforeseen situation.Consider buying fixer-uppers and living in them for two years in order to use the exclusion.Consider moving into your rental houses for two years before selling them. You would avoid most of the gain.If you divorce, don’t buy a home from your ex-spouse as part of the divorce. Instead sell the home to a third party and use the tax-free money to purchase a new home. You can even buy the home back as long as it isn’t part of a prearranged plan. Making Colleges Less Expensive with Tax Planning Binghamton University Motto, “ W e’re only 207 road miles from Yale.” T —Tony Kornheiser, Washington Post oward the end of her junior year, we were investigating colleges for my daughter. When I heard about the current tuition and fee rates, I was having an “out-of-body experience.” Most private schools charged between $24,000 to $38,000 per year for tuition alone! When you filter in the outrageous fees that colleges are now surreptitiously adding plus the high cost of room and board and books, the cost can easily equal or exceed $50,000 per year. Imagine having to buy a BMW every year, which is what paying for college is akin to. Although the public schools were a lot less expensive, they too have been increasing their tuition rates from 6 percent to 10 percent per year, with many experiencing double-digit increases in tuitioIn fact, over the last 30 years, college tuition costs for both public and private schools have risen far more than our cost of living. College costs today are much less affordable to the average American than they were for our parents. The good news is that Congress added some great tax benefits to help reduce the sting of high tuition and fees. These benefits provide tax-free savings accounts for colleges, otherwise known as Qualified Tuition Plans, and tax credits, which reduce Chapter OverviewUnderstand why most people should set up qualified tuition plans for their kids’ future education.Learn the great benefits of both the Lifetime Learning Credit and the Hope Tax Credit.Understand the rules of deducting student loan interest.Learn how to deduct up to $4,000 of college expense5your taxes on a dollar-for-dollar basis. In addition, you may now be able to deduct some student loan interest if you meet the rules and may even deduct some of the college tuition costs. Yes, you read this correctly. Thus, if you have dependents going to college, or are in college now, or even if you are considering attending college, this chapter could be a goldmine for your bank account. Deductibility of Educational Expenses I get asked many times, “Can I deduct the cost of college, or the cost of taking a course, or of going for a graduate degree?” General Rule For courses to be deductible they must either maintain or improve skills required by your present job, trade, or business; or must meet the express requirements of your employer; or must be required in order to retain your salary, status, or rate of compensatioIf you meet these tests, you can deduct your tuition, fees, books, and certain travel and transportation expenses. Example: Sally takes some courses in order to maintain or improve her job skills as an accountant. She may deduct not only the tuition and fees and books but also her round-trip transportation to the school. Example: Gina is a teacher who is taking a college course related to teaching English as required by her school. She may deduct all the costs related to this course. Exceptions to the general rule Although the above-noted general rule sounds easy to understand and apply, it is a bit misleading. Congress and the courts have carved out some exceptions to this rule. The main exception is that despite meeting the requirements of the general rule, the education isn’t deductible if it either meets the minimum educational requirements for qualification in your current trade or business (or job) or is part of a program of study that would qualify you for a new trade or businesThe question thus becomes, “whether the course or program of study qualifies you for a completely different task than you were previously qualified to perform.”5 Let me give you some examples of those courses and programs that would be deductible and also those that wouldn’t be deductible. This will give you a feel for what you can and cannot write off. Courses and programs that were held to be deductibleA night manager for a store could deduct a food market management program. An aeronautical engineer was allowed to deduct the cost of a graduate degree in business management and administration since he also performed someadministrative and management duties in his job.7Even obtaining a master of business administration (MBA) was held to be deductible if you have a current job that involves skills and tasks related to the MBA, such as cost analysis, marketing, advertising, managing, etc. Note: However, a new case notes that you had to have worked at your current occupation more than a few months to be considered to have a trade or business or occupation. As a recent case notes, if you work at a job for only two months before getting fired, you may not be able to deduct the tuition for attaining an MBA. Caution: The costs associated with obtaining an MBA wouldn’t seem to be deductible if you didn’t have a current job that involved duties and skills related to the MBA.Costs involved in becoming a specialist in your profession would also be deductiblThus, a lawyer who pursues a master in taxation law could deduct the costs if that lawyer is currently employed as a lawyer or accountant. Other examples would be an elementary teacher studying to teach secondary school, a math teacher studying to teach science, or a classroom teacher studying to be a guidance counselor. Examples of courses that would not be deductible because they qualify for a new trade or businessObtaining a law degree or taking a bar review course.9Taking a CPA review coursThe costs associated with obtaining an undergraduate degree are not normally deductible because they are deemed to qualify you for a new trade or businesThe Bottom Line If your program of study simply maintains or improves your current job skills, the program would be deductible unless such a program qualifies you for a new trade or business. Qualified Tuition Programs (QTPs) and Prepaid Tuition Wouldn’t it be great if you could set up a special savings account that would earn tax-free interest and tax-free gains and could be used for most college expenses? The answer is that you can with a Qualified Tuition Program (QTP). There are essentially two types of these programs. The first is a prepaid tuition program that is used mostly for state universities. Here you would prepay a set amount that covers all tuition. The second is a form of investment fund that can be used for all qualified higher education expenses and for any school, whether it is publicly supported or privately supported. Tax consequences of QTPs QTPs are not tax deductible; however, the benefits are tax-free to the extent that they are used for qualified higher education expenses. Example: Juan prepays $25,000 to the University of Maryland. Six years later when this money is used to pay for the tuition of his daughter, the proceeds are all tax-free. Prepaid tuition programs, unlike that of other QTPs, are only usable to prepay tuition and not room and board. They usually cover all four years regardless of the cost of living increases. Some of them, such as the one set up in Maryland, can even be used for other non-Maryland state schools. The state of Maryland will pay what would have been the highest in-state tuition for a Maryland state university. Thus, if your state has a program akin to that of Maryland, they can use the money for any school. However, you really need to check out what happens if your kids don’t attend your state university. Not all states have such a consumer-friendly program. Also, transfers to the QTP qualify for the annual gift tax exclusion, which is $14,000 per year per beneficiary if you are single and $24,000 per year per beneficiary if you are marrieThus, there is no gift tax if you limit the per-person contribution to less than or equal to these amounts. Qualified Savings Plan This is another type of Qualified Tuition Plan for higher educational expenses. It differs from a prepaid tuition plan in that it can be used for both graduate and undergraduate studies. Also, it can be used for a lot more than just tuition and required fees. See the following paragraph for the allowable Qualified Higher Educational Expenses that can be covered using this type of savings plan. What are qualified higher education expenses? This is the great part that you are going to like. Qualified higher education expenses consist of tuition and required fees, books, required supplies, and required equipmenYou can even pay your child, from the qualified tuition plan, for a computer and for Internet access charges.It also includes room and board for eligible students who attend at least half-time. Example: Rich has a daughter attending college and covered by a QTP. Her tuition, room, board, and books total $32,000. The QTP distribution can cover all of the $32,000 on a tax-free basis. No income limitations for QTPs: Unlike that of other educational benefits and credits, there are no income limitations for using QTPs. In addition, the kiddie tax rules, discussed in Chapter 4, don’t apply to earnings in QTPs. Thus, you could be making millions of dollars annually and still be eligible to set up and fund a QTP. With the kiddie tax age increased to 18, use of a QTP is even more important now than ever. QTPs can also be used to pay expenses of special needs beneficiaries for any expenses involved in either enrollment or in attendance at the schooIf you have children who are handicapped and need special services such as wheelchairs, readers for exams, etc., QTPs could presumably be used to pay for these services. Contributions to QTPs All contributions must be made in cash or by check or by credit card. Thus, you can’t contribute your stock portfolio to the QTP. Caution: In addition, there are few limitations noted on the QTP. The IRS, however, is a bit of a killjoy here. They have published some private letter rulings noting that either the QTP has to pay for the anticipated qualified higher education expenses for each dependent, which should presumably include a cost of living increase,17 or, alternatively, up to five times the cost of tuition at eligible collegeThus, this area is in flux, and you need to see a good financial professional in order to determine what maximum amount of contribution you are allowed for each dependent. In fact, you should see a good financial planning professional about setting up a QTP plan, other than that of a prepaid tuition plan, which is usually covered by your state. Many types of qualified beneficiaries can be covered What is so great about a QTP is that you can cover just about any person. In fact, if the person covered decides not to use the plan, you can transfer the proceeds on a tax-free basis to any other qualified beneficiaries. This is a huge list of people:SpouseAny descendant of you or of your spouseStepson or stepdaughterStepfather or stepmotherAny in-law such as daughter-in-law or son-in-law; even a brother-in-law or sister-in-law qualifiesSpouses of any of the above-named people As you can see, you have a host of people that you can cover with a QTP. However, you should also take note that your cousin is not a qualified beneficiary. You can use American Opportunity Credit on QTP expenses: Later on, you will learn that many middle-class taxpayers can claim a American Opportunity Tax Credit on the first two years of college tuition expenses. Tuition and medical exceptions: As noted above, you can give each person up to $16,000 in 2022 with no gift tax. However, there are some exceptions in which you can give an almost unlimited amount in one year without a gift tax. Big exception: The first exception is tuitioAny tuition that you provide for your family that is paid directly to a college or university for education and training are exempt from the gift tax and are thus not subject to the $16,000 limits in 2022. Example: Donald, a famous real estate investor, pays $100,000 in tuition to Bentley College, which should cover four years of tuition and required fees for his grandchild. This amount is not subject to any gift tax. The second exception from the gift tax involves payment of medical expenses. If Donald, noted above, pays for the medical expenses of his grandchild, these would not be subject to any gift tax. As a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, everyone gets roughtly an $12.06 million lifetime exemption from estate and gift taxes in addition to the yearly $16,000 exclusion. A married couple get a bit over a $24.12 million lifetime exemption. Series EE and Series I Government Bonds This is a great way for lower and middle income parents to save for college costs for their dependents. The interest from these bonds is normally taxable for federal income tax but usually exempt from state income tax. However, if the bonds are used to pay for qualified tuition and fees for higher education for you, your spouse, or your dependents, the interest could be tax-freQualification for tax-free status There are certain qualifications that must be met to make the interest on series EE and series I bonds tax-free: a. It can only be used for higher education expense: Higher education expenses are tuition and required fees only. The costs of room, board, and books don’t qualify, unlike that of other tax credits and QTPs. Why Congress didn’t allow for room and board here, as it does for other tax provisions, is a mystery. This is just another example of “tax simplification.” b. It must be purchased for the education of the taxpayer, his spouse, or his dependent: If you use the bonds for your education, your spouse’s, or for your dependent children’s, you would qualify for the tax-exempt status of the interest, assuming that you meet the other tests. However, if the bonds were purchased by a grandfather for his grandkids, the interest would be fully taxable unless the grandkids qualified as his dependents. c. You must be on the cash basis: With series EE bonds, you have a choice of being taxed each year on the interest, which is known as being on the accrual basis, or you can wait until you cash in the bonds and become taxed on all previous interest at the date that you received the cash for the bonds, which is considered the cash basis. You can’t have made an election to be taxed on each year’s interest, which is the accrual basis.d. You must be at least age 24 when you purchase the bonds e. You must not earn too much money: This is Congress’s gotcha! To have all the interest tax-free for educational expenses, you can’t earn too much moneThe benefits of receiving tax-free interest from saving bonds used for education phase out are as follows for 2022:For single filers and heads of households: $85,800–$100,800.For married filing jointly: $128,650–$156,650.For married filing separately, there is no exclusion. Yuck! What these phaseouts mean is that if you are a single taxpayer or head of household and earn over $84,559 of modified adjusted gross income or if you are a married taxpayer who files a joint return and has a modified adjusted gross income of over $149,300, you won’t get any tax-free benefit from the savings bonds even if you meet the other qualifications. If you make less than these amounts, you will get a benefit. If you feel that you meet these rules, you should definitely see your accountant in order to see if you qualify. Getting tax-free interest from federal savings bonds can be a great way to save for college. Wonderful Tax Credits for Education Congress gives you two terrific tax credits for college tuition. As a reminder, a tax credit is better than a deduction because it results in a dollar-for-dollar reduction in your taxes. American Opportunity Credit22 This provides you with a tax credit for the first four years of undergraduate college. The credit is 100 percent of your college tuition up to $2,000 plus 25 percent of the next $2,000 for 2022 and thereafter. Thus, the total credit for each of the first four years would be $2,500 per year. This credit is available for you, your spouse, and for each of your dependents. Especially nice is the fact that you can claim this credit for each eligible dependent. Thus the $2,500 maximum credit is per individual and not per tax return. Example: John has three kids in college. (I definitely feel sorry for John.) He pays tuition of $5,000 for Jeremy, $18,000 for Matthew, and $34,000 for Allison. He may claim the maximum $2,500 credit for each kid, which totals $7,500 for each of the first four years of college. Caution: Phaseout of benefits: Sadly, Congress can’t make anything simple. The benefits of this credit start phasing out for married taxpayers filing joint returns if your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) exceeds $160,000 in 2022. It is eliminated completely if your MAGI equals or exceeds $180,000 in 2022. For single taxpayers, the phaseout limits are between $80,000–$90,000 in 2022; so much for tax simplification! Don’t claim your kids as dependents and give them the tax credit: If your income exceeds the phaseout amount so that you can’t get the credit, don’t be forlorn. Remember, where there is a willthere is a lawyer. If you don’t claim them as dependents, they should be able to get the credit for themselves. This will reduce thetaxes that they would pay on earnings from jobs or on investment earnings. I should note that they can’t claim this credit if you claim them as dependentThus, you would need to not claim the child or relative who is taking the credit as a dependent on your tax returBecause this provision excludes a student enrolled in a secondary school from the definition of an eligible student, it appears that the credit is not available for the expenses of a high school student taking courses at a college or universitCaution: Convicted drug felons: The American Opportunity Credit is not allowed for any student who has been convicted of a federal or state felony drug offensPresumably, if your kids were convicted of treason, murder, rape, or robbery, they would still be eligible for the American Opportunity Tax Credit. How stupid can Congress be?! However, this limitation for drug felonies does not apply for the Lifetime Learning Credit. Thus, if your kid was convicted of a drug felony, he or she is still eligible for the Lifetime Learning Credit. The Bottom Line This is a nice benefit that Congress gave to middle-income taxpayers. It’s too bad that they didn’t give it to everyone. Lifetime Learning Credit This is the second tax credit for tuition and related expenses such as tuition, books, supplies, and required equipment. The amount of the credit is 20 percent of tuition and related expenses up to $10,000 per year. Thus, the maximum yearly credit is $2,000.27 Difference between Lifetime Learning Credit and American Opportunity Credit Since you can only use either the Lifetime Learning Credit or the American Opportunity Credit for a specific dependent per year,28 you need to know the differences between the two credits. 1. Different credit amounts: The American Opportunity Credit gives you 100 percent credit for the first $2,000 of tuition and 25 percent for the next $2,000 for a total credit of $2,500 per student per year. The Lifetime Learning Credit gives you a 20 percent credit for tuition and related expenses, which includes fees, supplies, and required equipment up to $10,000, for a total maximum credit of $2,000 per year. 2. One credit is per student, and one is per year: You can take an American Opportunity Credit for each student’s tuition for postsecondary education. Thus, if you have triplets in college, during their first four years of college, you can get three Opportunity Credits each year. The Lifetime Learning Credit is one credit per year per tax return. Thus, your maximum credit is $2,000 regardless of the number of kids in college. Example: Kevin takes the American Opportunity Credit for the first four years of college for his daughter Karen. For the remaining years of Karen’s education, Kevin can claim the Lifetime Learning Credit. 3. American Opportunity Credits are only for the first four years of college: The American Opportunity Credits are only for the first four years of postsecondary education. The Lifetime Learning Credit can be used for any year of postsecondary education and even for graduate school. 4. Unlike that of the American Opportunity Credit, there is no half-time requirement for education with the Lifetime Learning Credit: The American Opportunity Credit requires that students spend at least half-time pursuing a degree. This means that they must take enough credits to equal one-half of a fulltime workload for at least one academic perioThere is no similar requirement for the Lifetime Learning Credit. The Lifetime Learning Credit can be used for any course or program of study that either leads to a degree by an accredited college or can be used for any course(s) that helps the student acquire or improve job skillIt can actually be used to take as few as one job-related course. Lifetime Learning Credit is available for convicted drug felons: Unlike the American Opportunity Credit, the Lifetime Learning Credit is available to convicted drug felons. Example: Christy, a professional photographer, enrolls in an advanced photography course at a local community college. Although the course is not part of a degree program, Christy enrolls in the course to improve her job skills. The course fee paid by Christy is a qualified tuition and related expense for purposes of the Lifetime Learning CrediIn the same taxable year, a taxpayer may claim an American Opportunity Credit for each eligible student’s qualified tuition and related expenses and a Lifetime Learning Credit for one or more other students’ qualified tuition and related expenses. However, a taxpayer may not claim both an Opportunity credit and a Lifetime credit with respect to the same student in the same taxable yeaExample: In 2022, Dan has two daughters in college. His daughter Allison is a first year, full-time student. His daughter Karen is a graduate student. Dan may claim the American Opportunity Credit for Allison and the Lifetime Learning Credit for Karen. Phaseouts for Lifetime Learning Credit: Congress can’t do anything in a simplified way. The Lifetime Learning Credit has a different phaseout than that of the American Opportunity Credit. For single taxpayers the credit starts phasing out at modified adjusted gross income of $59,000 and completely phases out at $69,000. For married filing jointly, the phaseout begins at $118,000 and completely phases out at $138,000. The Bottom Line Take the credit that gives you the best results.5. Deducting student loan interest: With ever-escalating college costs, many kids are saddled with a lot of debt as a result of their educational expenses. Congress came to the rescue by allowing up to $2,500 in interest on qualified student loan debt to be deductible per year. Sadly, this deduction starts phasing out for single taxpayers and heads of household whose modified adjusted gross income exceeds $70,000 in 2022 and is completely phased out for modified adjusted gross incomes of $85,000 in 2022. For married taxpayers filing joint returns the phaseout limits are between $145,000 and $175,000 in 2022.33 Moreover, you used to be able to deduct interest on debt on up to $100,000 of home equity debt. Since 2018, home equity interest is no longer deductible. If your modified adjusted gross income prevents you from claiming the student loan interest as a deduction, consider having your kids pay off the loan. If you don’t claim them as dependents and they are jointly liable on the loan, they should be able to take a deduction for the interest as an adjustment from gross income. I find it extraordinarily idiotic that Congress has different phaseout amounts in order to determine eligibility for the tax credits, for tax-free series EE bond interest, and for deducting student loan interest. In addition, Congress based the eligibility on modified adjusted gross income instead of simply using adjusted gross income, which you can easily determine from your tax return. I truly believe that something negative happens to the common sense of congressmen and senators when they are in office too long. Since the American Opportunity Credit gives a whopping $2,500 credit, you are usually better off using that credit unless you don’t qualify because of the income phaseout or for some other reason. In that case, you may be eligible to use the Lifetime Learning credit. The Bottom Line There are certainly a number of good tax credits and benefits for middle-class taxpayers that help ease the sting of high college costs. In addition, using Series EE bonds and especially Qualified Tuition Programs are great ways to save for your dependents’ college expenses. It certainly is better to use a QTP than trying to save up for college paying tax on the earnings. You can deduct all the ordinary and necessary educational expenses that maintain or improve either your trade or business or job performance. They are not deductible, however, if they either meet the minimum educational requirements of yourcurrent trade or business or are part of a program of study that qualifies you for a new trade or business.Qualified Tuition Programs (QTPs) are used to pay for postsecondary educational expenses. They are tax-free to the extent used for qualified expenses such as tuition, required fees, supplies, required books, and required equipment. There is no income limit for QTPs; thus, they are available to everyone.Prepaid tuition plans are a form of QTP. They are normally used to prepay state tuition and usually cover four years of tuition.QTPs are portable. Their benefits can be transferred to most lineal descendants, ancestors, or spouses of descendants or ancestors.American Opportunity Credits can be used on educational expenses paid with QTP funds.The American Opportunity Credit can save you $2,500 in taxes per student, applies to you, your spouse, and your dependents. However, this is available only for middle-income taxpayers. Thus, you must be aware of the phaseout of these benefits as your modified adjusted gross income increases.The American Opportunity Credit, is now available for four years of postsecondary school education but only if the student attends school at least one-half of what a full-time schedule would be. Thus, if a full-time schedule would be at least 12 credits, students would have to take at least 6 credits to qualify.The Lifetime Learning Credit gives up to $2,000 per tax return and not per student. It is available for students for any courses that improve their job performance or qualify them for a new trade or business. This credit has the same phaseout limit as that of the American Opportunity Credit.If you can’t qualify for either credit because of the income phaseouts, consider not claiming your kids as dependents and have them get the credit on their tax returns.Series EE and Series I bonds are great ways to save for tuition and required fees for you, your spouse, and your dependents. Be aware, however, of the phaseouts of this benefit if you make too much money.Don’t forget to deduct student loan interest of up to $2,500 per year. You can only do this if your modified adjusted gross income does not exceed the phaseout limits. If you can’t qualify for the deduction because of your earnings, consider not claiming your kids as dependents and have them pay the loan interest; at least, this would be a deduction for them on their tax returns.In lieu of taking a tax credit for tuition, you can elect to deduct up to $4,000 of the tuition. Tax Planning for Stock and Bond Investments Taxation with representation ain’t so hot either. —Gerald Barzan, humorist The affects of the federal tax system vary as to how investments are taxed. It does depend on your tax bracket and the type of investment you have. Having an understanding of the tax implications of your investments can make a big difference to your return on investment (ROI) as well as the type of investments that would be most suitable to you. There are several types of tax implications that can occur. You can either have:Completely tax exempt. This means that it is exempt from tax completely for both federal and state taxes. Municipal bonds issued by the state where you live would be an example of this.Partially tax exempt. This means that the investment will be free of tax for either the state or federal government.The purpose of this chapter is for you to:Understand the tax consequences of disposing of stocks, bonds, and mutual funds and receipt of dividends.Understand how to compute capital gains and losses.Learn what you need to accomplish in order to reduce your capital gains.Learn about the Wash-Sale Rule and how to avoid it.Learn about investment mistakes made by many investors such as: – Why you should hold stocks and bonds for more than a year. – Why you should keep good records for determining basis for both stock investments and for mutual funds and the methods allowed by the IRS to 247but not both. Treasury bonds are taxable for federal tax purposes but exempt from state taxation.Tax deferred. This means that you pay taxes on the investments down the road. However, they aren’t immediately taxable. Monies put into tax-advantaged accounts such as IRAs or tax-deferred annuities are examples of this.Ordinary income or fully taxable. This means that you would pay both federal and state taxes at your ordinary tax rates as if you earned the money as salary. Corporate bond interest is fully taxable as ordinary income.Capital gains. Here you would pay tax at your normal rates up to a set capital gains rate, which, as of the writing of this book, has a maximum capital gains rate of 20 percent plus a potential 3.8 percent surcharge. Thus, depending on income, the maximum federal long-term capital gains rate can be as high as 23.8 percent in addition to any state rate. Sale of stocks, bonds, and mutual fund shares can produce long-term capital gains. In addition, collectibles have a special capital gains tax of 28 percent. Interest can be either tax exempt or fully or partially taxable depending on the type of bond that you purchased. Capital gains and losses can also vary depending on the asset as well. For example, collectibles such as antiques, coins, and stamps are taxed at the higher capital gains rate of 28 percent. Stocks and bonds also have a bit of a cumbersome calculation. In order for you to fully understand some of the strategies that I will present, I want to give you the steps necessary when you have shortand long-term capital gains. You don’t need to be an accountant to understand this, and understanding the process can be very helpful. Here are the steps: 1. You would separate all bond and stock gains and losses into two categories: short term and long term. This means that anything held for over one year (such as a year and a day) would be considered long term. Anything held for less than that would be considered short ter2. You would separately compute your net short-term gains for all stocks and bonds that would be considered short terThus you would combine all short-term gains with short-term losses. Example: Laurel has $10,000 of short-term gains from mutual funds but has a shortterm loss from some stock sales of $4,000. Her net short-term gain would be $6,000. 3. You would also separately net out your long-term gains and losseThis would result in a net long-term gain or net long-term loss. 4. If one of these computations is a gain and one is a loss, you would net them out. Example: Assume that Carol and Nick have a net long-term loss of $10,000 but have a net short-term gain of $4,000. By netting these out, you would have a net capital loss of $6,000, which would be considered long term in this example. This leads to the following strategy: Strategy 1: Offset all capital gains with capital losses. Thus, if at year’s end, you have some capital gains, consider selling some stock or bonds that generate a loss. This way, you can offset any gains with the losses. In fact, you can even buy back your loss stocks if you wait at least 31 days after their sale. Caution: Beware of Wash-Sale Rule: This almost sounds like you are putting your stocks in your washing machine. In a sense that is what is going on. Taxpayers would sell their loss stocks on December 30, buy them back on January 2, and keep the same positions. In essence, they “washed” their gains away, if you will pardon my bad pun. In order to stop this, Congress enacted the Wash-Sale RulThis rule says that you can’t take a loss on any security, such as stock or bond or mutual fund, if you acquire, or enter into an option to acquire, substantially identical securities within 30 days either before or after the date of sale of the security. Whew, it is hard to believe that Congress actually has folks thinking about this. If you read what I said very carefully, you will see that losses on your stocks and other securities are disallowed if you buy identical stocks or securities within 30 days either before or after the sale of the stock loss. Thus, if you bought the same stock within 30 days before you took the loss, those losses would be disallowed. Moreover, for those quick-thinking taxpayers among you, the IRS also said that your spouse or corporation can’t buy identical stock in order to avoid this rule from applying to yoThus, the strategy would be as follows. Strategy 2: Wait at least 31 days either before or after the sale of any stock or securities at a loss before you purchase back the same stock or securities in order to be able to use the loss. I should also note that you can’t buy back identical securities. Thus, if you took a loss on Exxon stock, you can’t buy it back within 30 days. In fact, even convertible preferred stock from the same company is considered by the IRS substantially identical to common stock of the companHowever, stock from one corporation isn’t generally considered identical to stock from another corporatioStrategy 3: Consider buying stock in a different corporation within 30 days in order to avoid the application of the Wash-Sale Rule. 1. If both the short-term and long-term netted figures result in losses, you would then offset up to $3,000 of your other incomI should note that if you are married filing separately, you each can offset up to $1,500 of other income with capital losses. You would then carry all the losses forward to future years, and they keep the same status in future years. This means that they remain as either long-term or short-term losses. 2. If, however, both computations produce gains (thus, you have net short-term gains and net long-term gains), you would treat these net gains separately. The short-term gains are taxed as ordinary income, and the long-term gains, plus qualified dividends, are taxed at a maximum tax rate of 15 percent. If you are in the 15 percent or less tax bracket, your capital gains tax for federal tax purposes is zero! Corporate Capital Gains and Losses Corporations have a different treatment for capital gains and losses. First, corporations don’t get any special tax break for capital gains. It is all ordinary income. Second, if a corporation has a capital loss, that loss can be used only against the capital gains of the corporatioFinally, unlike individuals who can carry over all capital losses indefinitely, corporations can either carry back capital losses three years or carry over capital losses five years and offset capital gains in either the past or the futurExample: Tim has a regular corporation that has a $10,000 capital loss. If he has no capital gains that year, he can either carry back the loss for the prior three years or carry forward the loss five years and offset any capital gains. He cannot use the loss to offset income other than capital gains. Special rule for S corporations: S corporations are special, which might be why we call them “S corporations.” These corporations pass through all capital gains and losses to the stockholders. Thus the stockholders treat these capital gains or losses as earnings on their individual returns. This means that capital gains from S corporations can get the same 15–20 percentmaximum tax benefit and capital losses can be used against capital gains plus you can get an extra $3,000 of unused losses against any other type of income. Nice!Investment Tax Mistakes Made by Taxpayers Over the years, I have noticed a number of mistakes made by individuals regarding their investments. I would bet that at some time in your life, you make one or more of these errors. If you want to significantly increase your rate of return on all investments, not to mention avoid these mistakes, read the following very carefully. Strategy 1: Hold stocks and bonds for more than one year in order to obtain long-term gain. This is very important. You have to hold any capital asset for more than one year in order to obtain the benefit of reduced capital gains tax rates. Numerous folks, who missed this deadline by even one day, were subject to ordinary tax rates on their gains. The IRS isn’t a very forgiving agency in case you didn’t guess this. FIFO and LIFO aren’t names of dogs. Here is the problem: You bought shares in a mutual fund or stock in a corporation at different times and at different prices. Now you want to sell some of these shares. They have different basis and different holding periods because you bought them at different times. How do you calculate the cost basis of the shares you want to sell? The answer to this problem is that unless you adequately identified exactly which shares were sold, the IRS takes the position that you sold the oldest shares that you bought or were given to you as a gift, as determined by the date of the gifThis is known as “first-in-first-out” or, using the nice cuddly acronym, “FIFO.” Example: In 2005 Rachel bought some mutual fund shares as follows: January 2005, purchased 300 shares @ $30 per share = $9,000 March 2005, purchased 300 shares @ $40 per share = $12,000 If in 2014 Rachel sells 200 shares for $50 a share, unless otherwise specifically identified, she will be viewed to have sold the original shares, and she will pay tax on $20 ($50 sale – $30 basis) per share. This leads us to our next strategy. Strategy 2: Identify the shares sold and pay less taYou are allowed to specifically identify which shares were sold and change your tax effects. In the example above with Rachel, had she told her broker to sell the shares that she bought in March, she would have had to pay tax on only the $10 per share gain. Not specifically giving the broker instructions to sell the later-purchased shares doubled Rachel’s tax bill! The same can be said for shares sold at a loss. You want to sell the shares with the highest basis in order to get the bigger loss. Thus the rules are as follows:If you have a gain, sell the shares that give you long-term gain. If all shares qualify, sell the shares that have the highest basis. This will reduce the taxable gain to you.If you have a loss, sell the shares with the highest basis in order to maximize the loss. You might wonder why the government institutes FIFO as the default. The reason, which actually was to benefit stockholders, was that using FIFO usually meant that stock gains would be from the oldest purchased shares. This would normally result in long-term capital gain. However, as you can see, this isn’t always the best alternative. In order to avoid the FIFO rule, you need to adequately identify which shares are to be sold. You could do this by either specifically requesting shares be sold using the document number of the shares or by specifying to the broker (assuming that the broker has custody of the shares) exactly which shares are to be sold24 and getting a confirmation within a reasonable time of what was sold. Always keep copies of any e-mails or correspondence with the broker in case the IRS wants to ensure that you gave the correct instructions to your broker; otherwise, FIFO will be applied to you automatically. Strategy 3: Keep good records on your mutual funds. Mutual funds are a big problem for many people. You have to keep track of your basis in order to minimize your gain. The higher your basis, the lower your gain, and the less tax you pay. Basis for mutual funds starts off with what you paid. This is the same for stocks. Moreover, like stocks, mutual funds send you a statement of dividends and stock gains and dividends received. You are taxed on the gains and on dividends received. Many people reinvest these dividends, which creates a paperwork nightmare in trying to figure out your basis. Two Methods for Mutual Fund Basis Calculations Because mutual funds create basis headaches with numerous purchases, dividend reinvestments, and distributions over a period of years, the IRS gives you two ways to calculate your basis. Both methods have their pros and cons, and you should pick the one that you personally like the most, or feel is the least hassle. I should also note that you can use different methods for different funds or even for different families of funds within the same mutual fund. However, once a method is elected, you are bound by it unless the IRS gives you permission to chang1. Double-Category MethoIn this method, you would divide all mutual fund purchases and share reinvestments between those shares that you owned for over a year (long term) and those that you owned for one year or less (which would be deemed short term). You would keep track of all the purchases and of all taxable dividends for each category and divide the total purchases and taxable dividends in each category by the number of shares in that category. Whew, that was a mouthful. If the double-category method is too complicated, you can elect to use the single-category method. This method requires you to take the total basis of all shares you hold in the mutual fund, including those that were gotten through dividends and dividend reinvestments, and divide by the number of total shares regardless of the holding perioExample: Assume that you contributed $100 per month for 36 months to a mutual fund and reinvested $120 of dividends. Your total basis would be $3,720. If you owned a total of 120 shares, your basis per share would be $31. If you withdraw $500 from the fund, this would result in a sale of 16.13 shares. Thus, the average basis of your remaining shares, which in the example was $31 per share, stays the same until you purchase new shares. Your new remaining basis would be $3,220. This might not be easy, but it is easier than trying to determine the accuracy of what shares you sold, when you withdrew the $500, and trying to figure out the basis of these shares. In addition, you are deemed to have sold the older shares first, known as FIFO, unless you have specifically identified the shares to be sold.Making the election: In order to use one of the averaging methods, you need to make an election on your tax return for the first year in which you want the election to applThe election should say that you are using the single-category or doublecategory averaging method for determining both gain and loss for shares of [insert name of mutual fund]. It is a really easy election. You also should maintain good records of all calculations used in computing the averaging method. You should have a spreadsheet for each fund family Strategy 4: Don’t fail to use tax efficient funds. Most investors hold their mutual funds for the long term. Thus they are quite surprised to find that they get a bill for short-term gains realized by the fund. The reason is that mutual funds are not investments to the surprise of many. They are simply vehicles that hold assets such as stocks, bonds, and real estate. Thus they can sell some of their assets at a short-term gain if they didn’t hold the stock over one year. These gains and losses incurred by the funds are passed through to the shareholders. However, as of late, some mutual funds try to become more tax efficient. These funds not only try to buy shares in quality companies, but they also minimize the tax burden on shareholders by holding their underlying stocks or bonds for over a year. Thus gains would usually be long-term gains that would pass through to the shareholders of the fund as long-term gains instead of short-term gains. Investing in tax-efficient funds can certainly increase your rate of return, but they can also result in fewer tax headaches. There are a number of tax-efficient or tax-managed funds available that you can find with a Google search. Strategy 5: Put the right investments in the right accounts. One big question that I get a lot is, What are the best investments for my retirement accounts? Should I use stocks and real estate in my IRAs and own bonds individually? The answer to these questions will probably surprise you. In effect, there are two types of investment accounts. The first is a tax-advantaged account such as 401(k), IRA, simplified employee pension, and profit-sharing plan. The other plans are your normal or traditional investment accounts that you own in your name or own in joint names. Placing the wrong investments into the wrong account can literally cost you thousands of dollars each year! Here is the rule: Place investments that produce ordinary income into tax-advantaged accounts, and place investments that produce little tax or are taxed at long-term capital gains rates in traditional accounts. The reasoning for this is that monies that are distributed from tax-advantaged accounts are taxed at ordinary income rates. If you put stocks or other investments that normally produce long-term capital gains and dividends that are taxed at a 15 percent maximum tax rate into a tax-advantaged account, you have converted what would be a 15 percent rate into ordinary income, which can result in a federal tax rate as high as 35 percent. Yuck! Thus the best investments for tax-advantaged accounts are those that produce ordinary income such as corporate and Treasury bonds, mortgages, and stocks held for short-term gains. Stocks with long-term gain potential or those that pay high dividends are best owned individually. If you don’t have a lot of money to invest in traditional accounts, you might need to place some stocks in your investment accounts since that is all that you have for retirement. Strategy 6: Do not place real estate or tax-exempt bonds or even annuities in tax-advantaged accounts. As I noted above, all funds that come out of the tax-advantaged account, such as a traditional 401(k) and IRA, are taxed at ordinary income rates. Placing tax-exempt bonds into these accounts would convert tax-free interest into fully taxable interest. Moreover, real estate would also be a poor investment for tax-advantaged accounts despite what many of the promoters of real estate will tell you. Why? There are several big tax benefits of investment in real estate: it produces long-term capital gains on sale, if there is a gain, and ordinary losses if there is a loss. It allows for a lot of leverage since you can borrow most of the purchase price from a lender or from the seller. Finally, it also produces a lot of depreciation throughout the time you own the property, which you can use against the rent and maybe even your earned income. However, when you use a tax-advantaged account to own real estate, you have done away with all these real estate benefits. First, all distributions from the plan, including the real estate, will be ordinary income to you. Second, there will be no losses allowed on the sale of the real estate by the plan. Third, you can’t use borrowed money to buy real estate in a taxadvantaged plan. Thus you don’t get the benefit of leverage. Last but not least, you won’t get any depreciation deductions. The plan gets the depreciation, which is worthless to it since tax-advantaged plans don’t generally pay tax. However, as I am fond of saying, where there is a will, there’s a lawyer. If you want your plan to own some real estate for diversification, you should seriously consider owning some REIT stocks. These are real estate investment trust shares that are readily marketable like those of any stock. The distributions don’t qualify for the special 15 percent tax rate on dividends, and they don’t spin off any depreciation anyway. Thus you can get the benefit of owning real estate without the hassles. REITs are, in fact, ideal for tax-advantaged investments. Moreover, don’t own annuities in tax-advantaged investments. The reason is that annuities are tax deferred anyway, just like tax-advantaged investments. You won’t need to have them in tax-advantaged investments. Finally, as with real estate, don’t buy assets in your tax-advantaged investments that produce a lot of depreciation. I have seen people purchase vending machines and other equipment used for investment in their pension plans and, thus, lose all the depreciation from that equipment because it was in the plan. There are a number of tax implications from being totally tax-exempt to being fully taxable, when you sell stocks or receive interest and dividends. You always net out your capital gains against capital losses.If you have either capital gains or losses, sell other stock that has the opposite effect in order to either wipe out your gains or use your losses.Hold your stocks for more than one year in order to obtain long-term capital gains. This will result in a maximum tax to you of only 15–20 percent plus the state rate. However, there is an additional 3.8 percent Medicare surcharge on capital gains and rents, and taxable interest if you earn over $250,000 of adjusted gross income (AGI) and married; $200,000 of AGI if single; or over $125,000 of AGI if married filing separately.If you have a loss on the sale of stocks, bonds, or mutual funds, don’t buy the same security within 30 days of the sale of the bonds, stocks, or mutual funds. This is known as the Wash-Sale Rule.Shares of one corporation are not deemed identical to shares of another corporation.It is usually better to specifically identify the shares sold by your broker in order to minimize your taxes. Otherwise, the FIFO (first-in-first-out) rule applies.If you have a gain, sell the shares that give you long-term gain. If all shares qualify, sell the shares that have the highest basis. This will reduce the taxable gain to you.If you have a loss, sell the shares with the highest basis in order to maximize the loss.Keep good records of any purchases made for your stock and mutual fund investments. This should also include any reinvestment made with dividends. These records should include any copies of broker’s statements plus a spreadsheet for each mutual fund or stock showing purchase date, amount spent on the purchase (which includes any commissions), the number of shares, the cost per share, and whether it was a purchase of shares or a reinvestment of dividends.There are two alternative methods for keeping track of your basis in a mutual fund. The first is the double-category method and the second is the single-category method. They both take the total amount invested by you or invested with dividends and divide by your total number of shares. However, the double-category method breaks it down further between those shares owned for more than one year and those owned for less than one year.Consider using tax-efficient mutual funds that generally hold stocks over a year so that you can get long-term gains on their stock sales.Place investments that produce ordinary income into tax-advantaged accounts, and place investments that produce little tax or are taxed at long-term capital gains rates in traditional accounts.Do not place real estate or tax-exempt bonds, depreciable equipment, or even annuities in tax-advantaged accounts. There are tax consequences of taking depreciation when you sell your rental property at a gain. If there is a gain, you are taxed at a 25 percent rate for all gain up to the amount of depreciation you have taken. See Section 1(h) of the IRC. 8. Section 1(h)(1) of the IRC. Section 1(h) of the IRC and Notice 97-64, Section 4, 1997-2 CB 323. 10. This applies in 2018 to single people who earn less than $38,700 and to married people filing joint returns whose taxable income is under $77,400. 11. Section 1211(b) of the IRC. 12. Sections 1222(3) and 1222(4) of the IRC. 13. Section 1222(5) of the IRC. 14. Section 1222(7) of the IRC. 15. Section 1091(a) of the IRC. 16. IRS Pub Number 550 (2007), p. 55. 17. Rev. Rul. 77-201, 1977-1 CB 250. 18. IRS Pub. Number 550 (2007), p. 55. 19. Section 1211(b) of the IRC. 20. Section 1211(a) of the IRC. 21. Section 1212(a)1 of the IRC. 22. Section 1.1012-1(c)(1) of the Regulations. 23. Ibid. 24. Section 1.1012-1(c)(3) of the Regulations. 25. Section 1.1012-1(e) of the Regulations. 26. Section 1.1012-1(e) of the Regulations. 27. Section 1.1012-1(e) of the Regulations. 28. Section 1.1012-1(e)(4) of the Regulations. 29. Section 1.1012-1(e)(6) of the Regulations. 18 Trader versus Investor: The BestKept Secret Around Most people don’t realize that being in business is the last great tax reduction opportunity left. In fact, as noted in our tax strategies system, we actually have two tax systems. One is for employees, and one is for business. If you are an employee, you can deduct your home interest, property taxes, charitable contributions, and IRAs or 401(k) contributions—that is until some sort of flat tax or consumption tax is passed. However, if you are in business, you get all the deductions that employees get plus you can deduct part of your house, vacations, education for kids (if done correctly), and some automobile expenses. And you can set up a pension plan that makes any government pension seem paltry by comparison— and much more. Wouldn’t it be great if you could take advantage of all the business deductions that traditional and home-based business owners get by simply trading in stock and securities for your own account? You can, if you are deemed a “trader.” .By reading this chapter, you will learn the following:Advantages and disadvantages of being a dealerAdvantages and disadvantages of being an investorAdvantages and disadvantages of making the election to include capital gains as investment incomeAdvantages of being a traderAn understanding of the factors used by courts in determining trader status260Entities When buying stocks and bonds, you are considered to be one of three types of entities: a dealer, an investor, or a trader. We discuss all the pros and cons of each category. However, being a trader has a lot of the advantages of the other two categories with few of the disadvantages. All gains and losses from securities result in a capital gain/loss. Moreover, all investment-related expenses are business expenses, which are deductible on Schedule C as is the case with all other types of business expenses noted in our Tax Strategy program. Moreover, traders can claim deductions available to most homebased businesses if the trading occurs out of the home. Thus this is one circumstance where “you can have your cake and eat it too.” Who Is a Dealer? A dealer is someone who has an established place of business and regularly purchases securities for resale to customerIn addition, the courts generally note that to be a securities dealer, you must be licensed in securities and have an office that sells stocks and bondObservation: The IRS will rarely even consider you to be a dealer if you are not licensed in securities and work for or own a securities brokerage. Even if this is the case, it is still rare to be treated as a dealer in your own portfolio. Thus most people will not be considered dealers. Advantages of Dealer Status If you are a dealer, you can declare all investment expenses as a business deduction. In fact, even expenses normally not deductible for investors (such as convention and seminar expenses) would be deductible for dealerDealers can, therefore, set up qualified pension/profit-sharing plans and even claim home office expenses if the business is operated out of their homes. Moreover, if there is a loss from their activity, the loss may be used against any form of income (such as wages, interest, dividends, and pensions).4 Any loss that exceeds your yearly income may either be carried back 2 years or carried forward 20 years and may offset future income from any sourcFinally, unlike investors, dealers may sell securities at a loss and buy them back shortly thereafter and still claim the loss. Investors and traders must wait at least 30 days after the sale to buy back the securities to keep the losDisadvantages of Being a Dealer The one significant disadvantage of being a dealer is that all income is ordinary income, and thus you can rarely take advantage of long-term capital gains rates that can be as low as 10 percent. In addition, dealers pay Social Security on all income including stock saleDealers must also recognize gains and losses on all inventory on hand as if they sold it on December 31. This is called mark-to-markeAll gains recognized are considered ordinary income, and all losses result in ordinary losses, not capital losseObservation: Unless you own a stock brokerage company, don’t worry about being classified as a dealer. You will probably be either an investor or a trader. What Is an Investor? For the most part, court decisions have treated taxpayers as investors. In fact, it is very difficult not to be classified as such. The following are factors that the courts examine in order for someone to be classified as an investor:A major source of income is dividends or interesGenerally he or she holds for securities long term or at least six monthHe or she doesn’t usually have very frequent trades (usually less than 200 per year).12 Example: Mary buys and sells stocks and options for her own investment account. She usually holds stocks for at least one year or more and conducts about 50 trades a year. She makes substantial income from dividends from her stocks. Her status would be deemed to be an investor. The courts are real sticklers for trying to classify taxpayers as investors. If you want to obtain trader status, you really need to watch all the criteria noted above for investors. If you meet any of these, you will probably be deemed an investor and not a trader. Advantages of Being an Investor Without question, the single biggest advantage of being an investor is that most gains constitute long-term capital gains. The rules for long-term gains were complicated by the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997. Who says tax relief and simplification go hand in hand, because they don’t! The capital gains rate is dependent on the length of the holding period and your current tax rate. Congress is very good at giving benefits and taking some back. It is Congress’s way of increasing taxes without anyone knowing. This may be a major reason so many congressmen and congresswomen and senators get reelected. Investors have some serious disadvantages. They cannot deduct any expenses of attending a convention or seminar on investing. This disallowance applies to food, lodging, and transportation as well as the cost of the actual seminaYuck! Moreover, investors are also subject to some of their investment interest being disallowed. Investment interest (such as margin interest) is limited to investment income. However, you may carry over any excess unused margin interest and use it against investment income in the futurIn addition, you would think that capital gains count as investment income. Think again. In an effort to raise taxes without anyone knowing, Congress noted that capital gains don’t count as investment income for purposes of offsetting investment interesHowever, in order to avoid too much criticism, Congress allows investors to elect to have all capital gains treated as investment income. But before you run to make this election, you should be aware that any election to treat capital gains as investment income will prevent you from using the much lower long-term capital gains rates for that yeaExample: John has $5,000 of margin interest (investment interest). If he has $2,000 of dividends and $10,000 of capital gains resulting from the sale of stock, he may use only $2,000 of investment interest. The remainder gets carried forward. However, if John elects to treat his capital gains as investment income, he may use the full $5,000 of investment interest to offset his gain. Making the election: You may make the election by filing IRS form 4952. This form must be filed by the due date for your tax return (including any extensions). Observation: It usually is not advisable to make this election if you have substantial long-term capital gains. However, if most of your gain is short term or if you have a lot of investment interest with little investment income (i.e., dividends and interest), you may want to make this election. Problem for Investors Investment expenses such as newsletter subscriptions, seminars, computer charges and accounting fees are no longer deductible by investors as a result of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA).18 There is some good news though. Itemized deductions used to phase out under what was called the peace limitation. Thus, if you made over a certain income, you would lose 3 percent of your itemized deductions as your income exceeded a threshold amount. The good news is that there is no longer any phase out of itemized deductions as the peace limitation was eliminated by the TCJWelcome to the beginning of flat and consumption taxes. You are taxed on your income but get to deduct very little in the way of expenses against it. As you can see, this is a big disadvantage for investors and for the public at large. The main hidden goal of most of these tax reform proposals is to raise taxes. Second Major Problem for Investors Investors’ capital losses have some significant limitationYou need to first understand how capitals gains are computed. Investors take all their short-term gains and net these out with short-term losses. They then take any long-term gains and net these out with long-term losses. Net short-term gains are taxed at your normal tax rate. However, longterm gains, which are gains from sales of bonds, stocks, and mutual funds held over one year, get a special 0–20 percent plus a potential extra 3.8 percent surcharge on long-term gains for a total maximum tax rate of 23.8 percent. This is great for gains. However, losses are treated a bit differently. If you have a net capital loss, you can use that loss only against capital gains. However, despite this, you are allowed an extra $3,000 of capital losses against any other form of income; the remaining losses getting carried over to future years. Example: Lynn and Joe have net capital gains from some stock sales of $10,000. However, they also have some capital losses of $30,000 resulting from the stock market decline. They may offset $10,000 of these losses with the capital gains and then take an extra $3,000 against their earned income. The remaining unused $17,000 of losses gets an unlimited carryover to future years and is treated as if these losses were incurred in those years. Trader Overview As you can see, being an investor has some big advantages (capital gains on security sales) and some big offsetting disadvantages (either no deduction for expenses or phaseouts of those deductions that would be allowed and capital loss limitations). There is a third category available to you. This category is called a trader. Amazingly, many people are not aware of this status and are also not aware of how beneficial this status can be. Traders get many of the advantages of being a dealer with the ability to get capital gains on stock, bond, and option sales. In addition, traders can deduct investment expenses with no phaseouts or thresholds! Thus it achieves the best of all worlds yet eliminates most of the negatives. Trader Advantages There are a number of advantages to being considered a trader. First, all gains from the sale of stock, bonds, and options are treated the same way as they are with investors; they result in capital gains and capital losseHowever, as you will learn, most of the gains and losses must be short term in duration. Second, and most important, traders may treat all investment expenses as business expenses and not as itemized deductionTraders are deemed to be in business. This means that, as a trader, you can deduct all convention and seminar expenses that are directly related to your trading business (unlike an investor), and all investment expenses are deductible with no thresholds (as with a dealer). Moreover, you can deduct all other reasonable business expenses since a trading business is considered to be a business just like any other type of business. In fact, the expenses are reported on IRS Schedule C. Investers, as a result of the TCJA, can no longer deduct investment expenses such as publications as itemized deductions. Example: Susan has $20,000 of gains as a trader and has incurred $4,000 of investment expenses such as stock advisory fees, safe deposit fees, accounting fees, and management fees. The $20,000 is capital gain (probably short term), and the fees are completely deductible dollar for dollar on Schedule C. In addition, traders are exempt from the investment interest limitations just as dealers are because traders are deemed to be in a businesTraders may also use the mark-to-market rules (discussed below for commodity traders) like dealers and recognize gain and loss on all securities held on December 31.24 Last, but not least, a trading business is not subject to Social Security taxes unlike most traditional businesseMark-to-Market Election Mark-to-market election is a special rule that applies to all traders, but it is especially valuable to commodities traders. This election allows traders to recognize all gains and losses at year end as if the stock or commodity were sold on December 31. For stock traders, this isn’t a good deal since they would have to recognize gain even though the stock or bond wasn’t sold. However, for commodity traders, this could be a good deal because by making this election, you can recognize 60 percent of your gain as long-term capital gains! The catch, of course, is that you have to recognize your gains even though you may not have closed out the position. However, you would also recognize loss positions, which would help offset some of these gains. As you can see, being a trader is almost too good to be true. You get all the positives of being a dealer with none of the negatives. However, since it is so good, the IRS, being the grouchy organization that it is, makes it tough to classify yourself as a trader. It is doable, but you must meet all the rules noted here. What Is a Trader? Amazingly, there is no Internal Revenue Code section defining “trader status.” However, there are literally dozens of cases dealing with the subject. Thus the concept of being in the business of trading your own securities is well established in tax law. The cases note that being a trader lies somewhere between being a dealer and being an investor. Although “trader status” is a factual issue, there are a number of factors that the courts examine in order to determine whether you meet this status: 1. Traders trade securities on a frequent and regular basis in order to catch the short-term market swingThis frequency must be regular. Simply working hard at managing your portfolio is not enough if your trading is not frequent and regulaThus, in one case Mr. Boatner was held to be an investor and not a trader even though he worked 40–60 hours a week in managing his portfolio because he had only 5–12 days of trading per year. Moreover, the tax court has held that 29 purchases and 22 sales in a year was not deemed frequent enougLikewise, only 75 transactions per year wasn’t held to be frequent and regular enougIn one case, however, 332 transactions worth a total of $3.2 million qualified the taxpayer as a tradeHere the taxpayer not only put in a substantial amount of time in managing his portfolio but also talked to officers of companies. He also attended numerous lectures on security and investment topics and on trading. Observation: As noted in Chapter 8, you can never get enough training. You should document any training that you attended and any other day-to-day activities involved in managing your portfolio. A good diary works wonders here. You can get a tax diary from our offices at Tax Reduction Institute. See www.taxreductioninstitute.com. 2. The transactions should be throughout the year and not solely over a short period. In fact, even large numbers of transactions are not enough if they’re carried out in a short period of time. Thus, in one case, a taxpayer had 326 substantial transactions in a year. Normally, this would be enough to constitute being a trader. However, 40 percent of all transactions occurred in a one-month perioObservation: Being in business is a year-round occupation. The courts have not allowed trader status for people who don’t have numerous transactions all year round. The key is to trade at least 4 days a week (and preferably 5 days a week) and at least 10 days a month for most of the months throughout the year. 3. Traders do not have a substantial amount of dividends, interest, and longterm capital gains. Regardless of the frequency of transactions, if a substantial part of your income is from dividends, interest, or long-term capital gains, you will be deemed an investor and not a trader. This point cannot be overemphasized. A great illustration of this is found in two cases. Mr. Moeller 32 had over 1,000 transactions throughout the year. He was not held to be a trader because most of his income was composed of interest and dividends. A great but gross example of this point occurred in a little-publicized case called RopfogeHere the taxpayer had over 12,000 transactions. You certainly can’t beat this for frequency and regularity. However, because most of the profit came from dividends and long-term capital gains and not short-term gains, he was held to be an investor. Likewise, having a thousand or more transactions during the year is immaterial regardless of how hard you work or how much time you put in if most of your gain is long-term gaiObservation: There are numerous other cases involving this issue. The bottom line is that traders hold securities, for the most part, for a short period of time (usually less than 30 days and preferably a shorter period of time). This results in most gains being short term and very few dividends accruing. 4. Most of the gain should be short-term gain from securities held less than 30 days. As noted, the type of income that you generate is very important. Traders trade for short-term market swings. They usually do not hold stock for long-term gains like investors. This is a vital distinction. Mr. Mayer was a good illustration of this poinHe worked full time managing his portfolio. He had so many transactions that a brokerage firm provided him with an office. He had over 1,000 purchases and sales during the year totaling over 1 million shares. However, only 6 percent of these shares were held less than 30 days. Most were held long enough to obtain long-term capital gains (at that time there was a six-month holding period for long-term gain). The court held that Mr. Mayer was not a trader but was an investor. Interestingly, Mr. Mayer was so upset with this decision that he fought the IRS twice on this issue in two different courts by altering some minor facts. I guess some people can’t take a hint. Observation: Traders can have some long-term gain. If you feel that you have a winner, you surely can hold on to it for a long period of time. Although there is no hard-and-fast rule as to how much of your gain must be short term, a good rule of thumb should be that approximately 80–90 percent or more of all securities purchased should not be held for more than 30 days. Since traders must hold most securities under 30 days, if you want to hold some securities over a longer term, put the title to these securities in a different name. You could title the securities in the name of your kids, or spouse, or even set up a separate corporation for your investments. You can even run your trading business out of a subchapter S corporation (since all income and losses flow through to you as a stockholder) and keep your investments in your personal name. (See Chapter 9, dealing with finding the best entity for your business.) 5. Traders control all purchases and sales of securities and do not use money managers except as advisors. As in any business, you must materially participate in order to deduct business expenses above business incomThis means that you must be involved in your business regularly and continuously. This generally means working at least 100 hours per year more than anyone else or working at least 500 hours per yeaLikewise, you should be making all purchase and sales decisions. If you are delegating this responsibility to money managers, you may well be treated as an investor and not as a tradeA good rule of thumb is as follows: the more involvement by you and less by others, the better. 6. The greater the volume, the better. There are certainly no numbers set in stone as to what amount of funds should be at stake to be a trader or what number of shares should be tradeMost cases leaning toward trader status usually involved hundreds of thousands of shares per year. Note: You do not need this amount per transaction. It is a per-year figure. You may not need to trade this many shares yearly. Probably the cases that have appeared in the courts with these high numbers have been there because of the vast amount of money involved. You may very well be deemed a trader with as few as a couple of hundred shares traded weekly. To be safe, however, the higher the volume traded per week, the better. 7. Treat your trading business as a trading business for IRS purposes. This simply means that you should put the beans in the right jar. If you are a trader, file Schedule C for your expenses and document your business expenses as noted in our tax advantage systeIn short, if you read our analysis of what constitutes a trader, you will get a good “feel” for what criteria are important in being considered a trader. This should provide a strong framework for you to plan your business. What Expenses Are Deductible for a Trader? As noted above, being a trader means that you are in business. You can, therefore, take all the ordinary and necessary business deductions that most other “traditional” businesses get. In addition, there generally are no limits, phaseouts, or thresholds to exceed for these expenses. Many of the business expenses that are available are found throughout this book and in my home study course, Tax Strategies for Business Professionals. However, the following is an overview of some of the more usual trader’s expenses:Safe deposit box rentalsAccounting and bookkeeping feesA portion of your home expenses (see Chapter 6)Car expenses allocated to your business (see Chapter 5)Subscription for investment publications, periodicals, and stock investment newslettersBooks on investing, trading, and security analysisSeminars on investing, trading, and security analysisVideo and audio tapes on investing and on security analysisTax advice such as this book or our Tax Strategies for Business Professionals seriesEquipment depreciation for business (computers, calculators, cell phones)Any investment reporting serviceSalaries of assistants and helpersBrokerage fees (which may be added to basis or subtracted from sales price)Meals and entertainment of analysts, brokers, and other related people (see Chapter 2)Season tickets, golf, movies, and plays. Travel to caretake investments or meet with money managers or corporate officers (see Chapter 3)Deductions for the equivalent of your children’s education and weddings byhiring them. There are three possible classifications for those who buy and sell stocks: dealer, investor, or trader.A dealer is someone who has a fixed place of business and regularly purchases securities for sale to customers.Dealers have ordinary income and can deduct all their ordinary and necessary business expenses. You probably won’t be classified as a dealer.As a rule, most taxpayers are treated as investors when buying and selling stocks. You get the advantage of capital gains and can get long-term gains.If you own stocks, bonds, and mutual funds over a year, you can get long-term capital gains, which provide a maximum tax rate of 20 percent plus a 3.8 percent Medicare surcharge plus state taxes. However, taxpayers who are in the 10–15 percent tax bracket anyway have a reduced long-term capital gains rate of zero!Investors can no longer deduct investment expenses because Congress eliminated all miscellaneous itemized deductions. Stock traders, on the other hand, can deduct investment expenses. Investors also have their capital losses limited to their capital gains; however, they can get to use up to $3,000 of these losses against any other form of income. Any unused losses get carried over to future years forever and are used as if these losses were earned in those years.Traders are investors who meet certain criteria. They have the advantage of getting capital gains, like investors (although the gain is generally short term), and, unlike investors, they can deduct investment expenses and investment seminars with no threshold.Commodity and currency traders can make mark-to-market elections and have 60 percent of their gains treated as long-term capital gains.Being classified as a trader is tough to do. According to a number of court decisions, you must meet all the following criteria: – Traders trade securities on a frequent and regular basis in order to catch the short-term market swings. This means that you should have at least 300 or more trades per year. In fact, the greater the number of the trades, the better. – Transactions should be conducted throughout the year and not solely over a short period. You should be conducting your trading activities at least 4–5 days per week and at least 11 days per month throughout most of the year. – Traders do not have a substantial amount of dividends, interest, and long-term capital gains. At least 80 percent of your income should not be from interest and dividends. – Most of the gain should be short term from securities held less than 30 days. In fact, it would be even better if most of your trades were closed within one week. – Traders control all purchases and sales of securities and do not use money managers except as advisors. – Treat your trading business as a trading business for IRS purposes. The money is the same, whether you earn it or scam it. —Bobby Heenan Who said crime doesn’t pay? Look at how much Madoff made. —Anonymous You are attending a seminar in a nice room with plenty of expensive audiovisual equipment. Many of the seats are filled with folks who are well-dressed and quite courteous. Out comes a speaker who is well-dressed and polished and seems to be very competent. He informs members of the group that they can eliminate paying taxes based on a number of legal arguments. He cites numerous cases that have supposedly supported his arguments. Stop! Before you blow your hard-earned cash on his training materials and documents, take a deep breath and read this chapter. There are a number of tax scams, not to mention other types of fraud, which are being .This chapter covers the following: 1. Tax scams such as: a. Phishing scams b. Economic stimulus scams c. Frivolous tax arguments d. Fuel credit scams e. Hiding income offshore f. Abusive retirement scams g. Claiming zero wages h. Filing false claims for refunds i. Return-preparer tax fraud j. Disguised corporate ownership k. Misuse of trusts l. Abuse of charitable contributions and organizations m. Slavery tax credits 2. Investment scams a. Ponzi schemes b. Trading software scams c. High-priced training scams 3. Inheritance scams272perpetrated upon the American public. It has become such a widespread phenomenon that many of the enforcement agencies are overwhelmed. My purpose is to protect you, dear reader, from being another victim of the newest types of thefts: 1. Tax scams. There are an ever-increasing number of scams being investigated by the IRS. Some of these scams are so devious and clever that even the smartest of folks can be fooled. Every year the IRS publishes a list of the “dirty dozen” tax scams. Here are some of the latest scams being investigated by the IRS. a. Phishing scams. Folks are receiving letters or e-mails with the IRS/Treasury department logo informing them that they may be owed a refund or to inform them that they may owe a lot of taxes unless they clear up a possible error in identity. In order to obtain this refund, or to clear up the error, they have to prove that they are the right person by confirming certain personal information such as social security number, mother’s maiden name, address, and so on. To date, the IRS has identified as many as 1,500 different phishing scams. The IRS will never call you or write you asking for this type of personal information. You should never provide it to anyone by phone, letter, or e-mail. If you get an e-mail requesting this type of information allegedly from the IRS, forward the e-mail to phishing@irs.gov. b. Economic stimulus scams. Some scam artists are trying to trick individuals into revealing personal financial information that can be used to access their financial accounts by making promises relating to the economic stimulus payment, often called a “rebate.” To obtain the payment, eligible individuals in most cases will not have to do anything more than file a federal tax return. But some criminals posing as IRS representatives are trying to trick taxpayers into revealing their personal financial information by falsely telling them that they must provide information to get a payment. Sometimes, these criminals might ask for bank account information for the IRS to directly deposit the rebates, which then results in the thieves cleaning out the bank account. The IRS will never ask for this type of information regarding your social security number or bank account information. c. Frivolous tax arguments. There are a host of frivolous arguments being made by promoters of scams that purport to reduce or even eliminate most tax liability. Some of the many fallacious arguments are:Taxes are unconstitutional or not properly codified by Congress.Folks are promised a nonexistent mariner’s tax deduction. .(Cont.) 4. Pyramid scams 5. Advertised products scams, especially on infomercials 6. Jobs scams 7. Fabulous offer scams 8. Free vacation for attending a seminar scams 9. Telephone scams 10. Seminar and investment scams 11. Book scams 12. Identity theft and what to do if you are a victim Tax filing is “voluntary,” and thus you don’t have to pay anything.Taxes are required only for federal employees.There is no statute that properly codifies the tax code.Wages, tips, and other service income are not taxable. You can get a complete list of these frivolous arguments by going to www.irs .gov/pub/irs-utl/friv_tax.pdf. None of these frivolous arguments has won in court. In fact, the judges are so tired of hearing them that they are assessing the government’s legal fees against those who make these arguments in court. d. Fuel credit scam. Sometimes there is some truth behind the scam. Farmers are allowed a fuel tax credit for off-highway business purposes. However, some individuals are claiming the tax credit for nontaxable uses of fuel when their occupation or income level makes the claim unreasonable. Fraud involving the fuel tax credit was recently added to the list of frivolous tax claims, potentially subjecting those who improperly claim the credit to a $5,000 penalty. e. Hiding income offshore. To my knowledge this scam has been around for years but is now being aggressively investigated by the IRS. Promoters are promising that by placing assets offshore in foreign banks or tax havens, taxpayers would avoid all taxes and, at the least, not have their income discoverable by the IRS on these accounts. Interestingly, some Swiss banks helped promote this scam to the detriment of those involved. As an offshoot of this, some promoters set up foreign credit cards and promised that all income earned is paid to the credit card. This way, they promote that there will be no tax and that the IRS will never find out. U.S. citizens are taxed on their worldwide income. Setting up foreign bank accounts will not shield them from taxation. Even worse, on the federal tax return, there is a question about foreign bank accounts. Now a taxpayer may have foreign accounts for many reasons; however, if a taxpayer doesn’t disclose these accounts, he or she is subject to criminal fraud penalties. Moreover, the IRS is aggressively investigating these accounts and has cut deals with most foreign jurisdictions. f. Abusive retirement scams. The IRS continues to uncover abuses in retirement plan arrangements, including Roth Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs). The IRS is looking for transactions that taxpayers are using to avoid the limitations on contributions to Roth IRAs. Taxpayers should be wary of advisors who encourage them to shift appreciated assets into Roth IRAs or companies owned by their Roth IRAs at less than fair market value. In one variation of the scheme, a promoter has the taxpayer move a highly appreciated asset into a Roth IRA at cost value, which is below annual contribution limits even though the fair market value far exceeds the amount allowed. Contributions to retirement plans must be made in cash and not with appreciated assets. Also there are limitations to yearly contributions, which must not be exceeded. g. Claiming zero wages. Some taxpayers try to file phony wageor income-related information such as Form 4852 which is a substituted W-2 or amended Form 1099 (for income, dividends, and royalties) in order to improperly reduce their taxes to zero. This type of behavior is being tracked by the IRS and is aggressively being prosecuted. Don’t get fooled into thinking that this scam will work. h. Filing false claims for refunds. Usually taxpayers file Form 843 to abate previously assessed taxes giving some fictitious argument. Even worse, many individuals who have tried this haven’t even previously filed a federal tax return. i. Return-preparer tax fraud. Perhaps this has been an ongoing problem for years. However, I have seen a dramatic increase in enforcement by the IRS against fraudulent tax preparers. Thirty years ago, it was rare if more than 2 or 3 tax preparers per week were barred from preparing taxes or representing taxpayers. Today, I have seen as many as 30 tax preparers per week barred from preparing taxes. The range of what these accountants are doing varies quite a lot. Some fraudulently puffed up their credentials claiming that they were CPAs or lawyers, which wasn’t the case. Some improperly gave the fuel tax credit noted above. Many inflated deductions for taxpayers that the taxpayers never paid for. As an example, there was one accountant who claimed for his clients thousands more in charitable deductions than the clients made. The IRS investigates these fraudulent accountants and audits all their clients. You should certainly look for an aggressive accountant but also one who is honest. j. Disguised corporate ownership. Some folks are forming entities in some states in order to hide the owners who are conducting a wide variety of illegal activities such as hiding income, money laundering, and so on. The IRS is working with state authorities to investigate these activities. No entity can guarantee complete shielding from the IRS. If the IRS wants to investigate an entity, it can get the names of the owners, officers, and any other pertinent information. There are some states that do promise increased privacy, such as Nevada. However, even a Nevada corporation can easily be investigated by the IRS. Don’t be fooled into thinking that any entity can be used to hide income from the IRS. k. Misuse of trusts. Many promoters have promised taxpayers that certain trusts can be set up to minimize taxes by deducting a wide array of personal expenses or avoiding estate taxes. While there is a kernel of truth to this, especially regarding estate taxes, these trusts must be set up correctly. Moreover, they usually do not allow for deduction of personal expenses. It is vital to seek a good, qualified tax attorney to verify that these trusts do accomplish what was promised and are set up correctly. Finally, putting property in trust where you can control the assets or receive distributions can result in you, the grantor, being taxed on all the trust income. l. Abuse of charitable contributions and organizations. Many promoters promise to maintain control over donated property while taking a deduction. Examples of phony charitable deductions involve taxpayers who claim tuition payments as charitable contributions. Also, if you own property for over a year, you can donate property and get a deduction for the fair market value. However, promoters have set up scams in which they sell paintings, antiques, closely held stock, and so on to taxpayers on the promise that they will get these taxpayers an appraised value of many times the cost in a year for charitable deduction purposes. These overvaluation scams are fairly rampant. m. Slaverytaxcredit.Althoughthisisn’tonthisyear’s“dirtydozen”taxscamsperse, the IRS has noticed that this is fairly widespread as a “frivolous argument.” Promoters promise African Americans a special tax credit as reparation for slavery and oppressive treatment. This is absolutely false, and no one should be fooled by this. n. Filing for false refunds. According to a recent article, identity thieves are using fraudulently gotten social security numbers to get false refunds from the IRS. This is a HUGE problem. IRS estimates that as much as $6 billion in false refunds were issued in 2013 alone! Scammers get social security numbers from hospitals, nursing homes, and even from lists of the dead. It is thus VITAL that you place a fraud alert every 90 days on one of the main three credit bureaus such as TransUnion, Experan, or Equifax. I think TransUnion will do this for you for free. Also, file your tax returns as early as possible. This will alert the IRS if someone files a new “false” return after you. Each year, the IRS publishes a new list of their “dirty dozen” tax scams. You should be aware of these widespread scams. They can cost you large penalties, and you may even be subject to criminal penalties if you follow the advice of the scammers. Avoiding these scams and running from people who promote them will make your life less taxing. 2. Investment scams. These comprise a wide array of activities, some of which follow: a. Ponzi scams. Many of us are aware of the Ponzi scheme perpetrated by Bernard Madoff. This is where new investors’ money is used to pay other investors “profits.” There is very little investment or profit made. However, not only has this scheme been around a long time, but, sadly, it seems to be very pervasive. Many folks have asked, “How can I avoid being a victim of these Ponzi schemes?” The answer involves several steps. First, always check out the money manager or promoter of the investment. This includes going to the BBB (Better Business Bureau). In addition, you should carefully read over their prospectus and see if you spot any glaring problems. For example, if there is a major down market, you probably should not be making money absent some very unusual conditions. Finally, and this is important, you should never have most of your money with any one money manager. You should diversify the management of your money. This includes not putting all your money in one hedge fund, one mutual fund, and so on. Since you are insured by the government for fraud for $500,000, you might consider putting no more than $500,000 with any one firm or person. Obviously, if you are worth hundreds of millions, this can be unwieldy. Thus, as a rule of thumb, you might want to limit your investment with any one manager or firm to no more than 10 percent of your total investible assets. b. Trading software scams. You attend a big seminar where you weren’t charged much money to attend (this should clue you in that you are going to be hard sold a product or service). There is a lot of excitement in the room generated by loud motivational music, famous speakers, high energy, lots of comments about avoiding procrastination, and so on. Suddenly a good-looking speaker gets up and promotes the fabulous value of his stock, commodities, or Forex trading software or training program. He cites wonderful glowing testimonials. He cites how much money you can make. He shows you actual profitable trades made by people, although these trades might not be a result of using the trading software. He shows you pictures of his big house and fancy car. He then guarantees you a refund of your several thousand dollar fee if you don’t like their training by the end of the first day. He notes that his training class has a limited number of seats. Suddenly, you see hundreds of folks running to the back of the room to take advantage of this “wonderful” limited time offer. Before you become another sucker, take a moment to breathe and thank me for warning you about this. Ask yourself a question: If you had a gold mine that simply needed a shovel to scoop up the gold, would you tell anyone about it let alone sell entry to the mine? The answer, if you are smart, is no way. Look at Warren Buffett as an example. He has made billions investing in companies. Despite this, you don’t see him publishing his formulas or his secrets for evaluating companies. Even if you had developed some fabulous software that continuously makes money as a trader by finding bargains or uncovering market trends, couldn’t you sell it to a major investment house for billions? Not only could you sell it for billions, but you would get capital gains on the sale, which means very little tax compared to the ordinary income that you would realize selling the software at seminars. In fact, the interest alone on the cash sale to the investment company would provide more money than you would make hawking the software at seminars. Moreover—and this is a seminar inside secret—the promoter of the seminar gets a huge piece of the profit for getting you in the room, not to mention that the salespeople get well paid too. Thus, why sell the software or training program at the seminar? The answer, if it didn’t occur to you, is that the software either doesn’t really work or doesn’t work better than other less expensive software on the market. c. High-priced training scams. Even worse, when you get to their “training” program, usually on the second day of training, which is after your refund period has run out, some of these organizations notify you that you really can’t use the best of their Web site or training materials unless you upgrade for a whopping extra $10,000 to $25,000 or more! Hey, you were a sucker once; why not try another pitch on you! If all this doesn’t alarm you enough, you should note that studies have shown that traders rarely make money long term anyway even with good trading software. I can honestly say that I know many traders, and very, very few have made money long term. Author’s rules for avoiding this scam: Rule 1: Never buy software programs at seminars that cost more than $2,000. Rule 2: Rarely buy training programs that cost more than $2,000 at a seminar unless you really know what will be presented at these programs. Go to the seminar’s or sponsor’s Web site and see who is speaking at the program. It would be best if you can do a Google search for all speakers or for their companies and see what others have said about their products and services. Checking out the products in advance can really make a big difference between knowing what you should invest in and what you should avoid. Let me be clear about this. There are some good-quality training programs, and some of these good programs are expensive. You really need to understand what you are buying, what will be presented, and what specific benefits will accrue to you from the training. Rule 3: Don’t buy their product or enroll in their seminar unless you get two pieces of information (from the speaker) that will either make a big change in your life or put money in your pocket! Speakers tend to overpromise and underdeliver. I ignore the hype of promising to make me rich and famous and allow me to acquire huge houses, fancy cars, etc. I look for content present in the sales presentation. My test is that I simply look for two items of information given by the speaker that will either significantly impact my life or put money in my pocket. If you can’t find two new ideas that will meet my test, then the speaker probably has little content to offer, and I would stay away from buying anything from that speaker. Note: I am not that demanding; however, you will find this to be a great test. 3. Inheritance scams. There seem to be a number of inheritance scams, otherwise known as Nigerian scams since they usually involve some Nigerian who wants you to provide a few dollars in order to get a clearance certificate from the U.S. The scam notes that they have over $15 million awaiting them, but they can’t get it into this country because of legal hassles and IRS clearance. They usually cite famous folks who can vouch for them. If you would provide American bank account information for them, they will transfer the full $15 million to you. All they want is for you to pay them 90 percent of the proceeds, keeping 10 percent for yourself. I actually got a letter like this and laughed at its obvious fraudulent content. However, it seems that many suckerserwronged victims fell prey to this façade and had their bank accounts cleaned out by the scammers. Never fall victim to this type of hoax. Never, ever give out your bank account information and bank routing number. Remember, if it sounds too good to be true, it probably is. 4. Pyramid scams. These fall into two categories. The first involves a clearly illegal scam involving chain letters. There are a number of names on the letter that you should send a copy to in addition to a check for money. If each of the people on the list does the same, you will supposedly make a lot of money. The catch is that it rarely happens that way, and it is plainly illegal to participate in this. Don’t do it. The second type of scam is the illegal pyramids that are structured as multilevel marketing (MLM) companies. Let me be clear about this. Not all network marketing companies are illegal. In fact, the vast majorities of them are quite legal, provide a very viable opportunity, and are quite good at providing good marketing and business training. I have personally met some folks in these businesses who have earned over $100,000 per month! No, I am not kidding about this. You can check out an article on evaluating a network marketing opportunity found in the articles section of my Web site at www.taxreductioninstitute.com. A legal MLM should encourage retailing of products in addition to recruiting. If the only way you can make money is to recruit other people to be distributors and if products cannot be purchased without being a distributor, it is probably an illegal pyramid. Most court cases require a certain amount of retailing of the MLM products to nondistributors for the MLM to be a legal operation. 5. Advertised products scams. I know you are thinking, “Wait, Sandy. Advertising is perfectly legal as long as the company doing the advertising lives up to its promises.” You are correct in thinking this. However, did you ever ask yourself, “Who pays for the ads?” The answer is that you do! Everyone who buys a product as a result of expensive television ads pays a lot more for that product than they would if they bought from a company that doesn’t advertise as much. This is particularly true if a well-known celebrity is pitching the product, which geometrically increases the cost of the advertisement. Check out the cash value of whole life products and term costs of companies that advertise a lot on television, and compare that to companies that don’t advertise as much. I learned about this the hard way. I had a radio show where we had advertisers. On my show I thought I was doing a service to my listeners telling them about companies that provide the most competitive rates. Thus I mentioned companies that had the lowest mortgage interest, companies that had the lowest stock commissions on the purchase and sale of shares, and so on. I even noted those insurance companies that had the best life insurance based on cash values. I then compared them to the companies that had the highest rates or highest prices for the same products or services. Interestingly, my advertising base slowly disappeared, and I eventually was removed from the show. Little did I realize that firms that were giving the best deals weren’t those that advertised! It was those that gave the worst deals or prices that did the most advertising. You will see a lot of companies suddenly hawking products on infomercials and TV. You should always carefully evaluate your potential purchase of these products. More often than not, I have found them to be of inferior quality and found that they don’t live up to the advertisement. Bottom line: Before you buy into that highly promoted toothpaste, razor, gold buying service, or wonderful new infomercial-promoted gadget, shop around for a better deal. 6. Job scams. Today, if you haven’t been right-sized or capsized, you are probably worried about being right-sized, capsized, or just laid off. Sadly, there are a number of scams being perpetrated on people who have experienced this. The scams vary from requiring payment for jobs to advertised jobs whose sole intent is to get money from the victim for some home-based business. You should never have to pay money in order to get a job unless the job offer actually comes through. Most legitimate employment agencies work this way. Moreover, advertising jobs that are really a home-based business scheme is just plain wrong and probably illegal. One exception to this might be newsletters. There are some employment newsletters that list jobs for a specific category such as federal job openings. Frankly, with some research, you could probably get this information for free. However, these occupational newsletters do perform a service and aren’t all scams. Just make sure that the jobs offered are real jobs and involve real, current openings. I have found that many jobs in the newsletter are closed to applications by the time you receive the newsletter. 7. Fabulous offer scams. You suddenly get a letter in the mail or by e-mail that you have won a big prize or can get a product at a fantastic discount. Sometimes, you are asked for a wire fee to cover the cost of the wire transfer. Don’t pay the fee. It is illegal for a company to charge a fee to give a prize. 8. Free vacation for attending seminar scams. You get a letter promising you free airfare for two and maybe even a free hotel stay for several days if you will attend a wonderful seminar that deals with vacation discounts. I attended three of these in order to check them out. I got vouchers that took over three months to arrive after a lot of complaining. In addition, the vouchers had so many restrictions that they were worthless. Moreover, the seminars were simply high-pressure sales tactics used to lure folks to purchase their overpriced vacation packages. Stay away from these. 9. Telephone scams. These come in many varieties. For example, you get a call from the “phone company” asking you to test your phone. In order to do that, they ask you to use *90 or #09. These scamsters can now make long-distance calls and charge it to your phone number. Never use *90 or #09. The second version of these types of scams has you dialing an 809 area code. You might get a message on your answering machine that your parent has died and to call a specific phone number or that you need to call a specific number to claim a prize. You are probably told to call an 809 number that will result in charges of $1,000 per minute and up. Sadly, these numbers are in locations that can’t be regulated by U.S. authorities. 10. Seminar and investment scams. There was an old joke that noted, “The most expensive thing in the world was a lady who was free for the evening.” Today, this has changed to “The most expensive thing in the world can be a free or almost free seminar.” No one offers seminars for free or at a very low cost without trying to sell you something! I hope that putting this in italics will indelibly make you remember this. I was reading about two retirees who attended an investment seminar run by an accountant who promised at least 8 percent return on their investments. Needless to say it was a Ponzi scheme, and they lost all of their money. Sadly, most folks trust people, and that is exactly what you should not do. Before you attend these free or significantly discounted seminars, always check them out on the Web. See what they are selling. Check out the organizations that are selling products. You will find, more often than not, that many of these products or services are just bad deals and way overpriced for what you are getting. Think about it: Both the seminar provider and salesperson has to be very well paid. Who do you think is paying for this? Answer: the suckers. Thus, the easiest way to avoid these types of fraud, according to Joseph Borg of the Alabama Securities Commission,1 is to ignore the pitches; hang up on the telemarketers; reject invitations to free seminars, especially free lunch or dinner seminars; and toss out mail with promises of surefire investments and cheap or free travel. I would follow the advice of the Kiplinger’s Retirement letter:2 Do not give any cold caller or visitor money, whether by wiring money or sending money orders or personal checks. If you suspect telemarketing fraud, call your state attorney general’s office or the National Consumer League’s Fraud Information Center at 202-835-3323 or go to www.fraud.org. Also never let someone push you into an immediate decision. Finally, never give out social security or bank account information to unsolicited callers or to someone you don’t implicitly trust. When in doubt, always, always check them out on the Web and with the Better Business Bureau before making a purchase. 11. Book scams. I was recently contacted by a well-known individual who wanted me to promote his book on my database. The e-mail promised to pay me for each person who bought his book as a result of my contact. He promised me leads and promised to pay me for other affiliates who have large databases. However, nowhere in the letter was there any discussion about what was in the book or why it would be a good book to read. He was solely interested in selling lots of copies during a one-week period in order to get on the bestseller list, and he assumed that I couldn’t care less about the quality of his work! Yes, this happens a lot too. Moreover, I have read other books by this person and found them to be very thin in both content and style. However, this person is a great marketer. Always be wary of folks who suddenly promote someone else’s book when it is first published. Don’t assume that because a book made some bestseller list, it is necessarily a good book. In fact, I know authors who have purchased enough books by themselves, supplemented by hiring folks to buy enough books, so that they can make a bestseller list. 12. Concealing assets in offshore accounts and improper reporting of digital assets. The IRS remains focused on stopping tax avoidance by hiding assets in offshore accounts and in accounts holding cryptocurrency or other digital assets. International tax compliance is a top priority for the IRS. New patterns and trends emerging in complex international tax avoidance schemes and cross-border transactions have heightened concerns regarding the lack of tax compliance by individuals and entities with an international footprint. As international tax and money laundering crimes have increased, the IRS continues to protect the integrity of the U.S. tax system by helping American taxpayers to understand and meet their tax responsibilities and by enforcing the law with integrity and fairness, worldwide. Over the years, numerous individuals have evaded U.S. taxes by attempting to hide income in offshore banks, brokerage accounts, or nominee entities. They then access the funds using debit cards, credit cards, wire transfers, or other arrangements. Some individuals have used foreign trusts, employee-leasing schemes, private annuities, and structured transactions in an attempt to conceal the true owner of accounts or insurance plans. U.S. persons are taxed on worldwide income. The mere fact that money is placed in an offshore account does not put it out of reach of the U.S. tax system. U.S. persons are required, under penalty of perjury, to report income from offshore funds and other foreign holdings. The IRS uses a variety of sources to identify promoters who encourage others to hide their assets overseas. Digital assets are being adopted by mainstream financial organizations along with many other parts of the economy. The proliferation of digital assets across the world in the last decade or so has created tax administration challenges regarding digital assets, in part because there is an incorrect perception that digital asset accounts are undetectable by tax authorities. Unscrupulous promoters continue to perpetuate this myth and make assertions that taxpayers can easily conceal their digital asset holdings. The IRS urges taxpayers not to be misled by this storyline about digital assets and, thus, expose themselves to civil fraud penalties and criminal charges that could result from failure to report transactions involving digital assets. “The IRS is able to identify and track otherwise anonymous transactions of international accounts as well as digital assets during the enforcement of our nation’s tax laws,” Rettig said. “IRS urges everyone to come into compliance with their filing and reporting responsibilities and avoid compromising themselves in schemes that will ultimately go badly for them.” 13. Fake charities that steal your money. Bogus charities are always a problem. They tend to be a bigger threat when there is a national crisis like the pandemic. Taxpayers who give money or goods to a charity may be able to claim a deduction on their federal tax return. Taxpayers must donate to a qualified charity to get a deduction. To check the status of a charity, use the IRS Tax Exempt Organization Search tool found at IRS.gov. Here are some tips to remember about fake charity scams:Individuals should never let any caller pressure them. A legitimate charity will be happy to get a donation at any time, so there’s no rush. Donors are encouraged to take time to do their research.Some dishonest telemarketers use names that sound like large, well-known charities to confuse people. Potential donors should ask the fundraiser for the charity’s exact name, web address, and mailing address, so it can be confirmed later.Be careful how a donation is paid. Donors should not work with charities that ask them to pay by giving numbers from a gift card or by wiring money. That’s how scammers ask people to pay. It’s safest to pay by credit card or check—and only after having done some research on the charity. 14. Offer in Compromise company scams. Here is a scam that has at least some degree of truth. The IRS has a program that will allow some taxpayers to pay pennies on the dollar to settle their tax debts. However, the problem is that there are companies that “promise” to settle your debt for pennies on the dollar if you pay a large upfront fee. The truth is that getting the IRS to accept this is VERY difficult. Even the most reputable companies in this area get 50 percent of their offers accepted by the IRS at best. Of the companies that are scammers, they are lucky if 5 percent of their offers are accepted, yet they get to keep your money. ALWAYS check out the reputation of these companies who try to get Offers in Compromise. Even better, if you pay a lot of money up front, get a guarantee that you will get a refund if they don’t deliver what was promised. 15. Identity theft. In our era of electronic purchasing of products through the Internet and wire transfers and credit cards, identity theft is becoming the biggest type of fraud worldwide. Here is what the Department of Justice says about it: Identity theft and identity fraud are terms used to refer to all types of crime in which someone wrongfully obtains and uses another person’s personal data in some way that involves fraud or deception, typically for economic gain. These Web pages are intended to explain why you need to take precautions to protect yourself from identity theft. Unlike your fingerprints, which are unique to you and cannot be given to someone else for their use, your personal data—especially your social security number, your bank account or credit card number, your telephone calling card number, and other valuable identifying data—can be used, if they fall into the wrong hands, to personally profit at your expense. In the U.S. and Canada, for example, many people have reported that unauthorized persons have taken funds out of their bank or financial accounts, or, in the worst cases, taken over their identities altogether, running up vast debts and committing crimes while using the victims’ names. In many cases, a victim’s losses may include not only out-of-pocket financial losses, but substantial additional financial costs associated with trying to restore his reputation in the community and correcting erroneous information for which the criminal is responsible. In one notorious case of identity theft, the criminal, a convicted felon, not only incurred more than $100,000 of credit card debt, obtained a federal home loan, and bought homes, motorcycles, and handguns in the victim’s name, but called his victim to taunt him—saying that he could continue to pose as the victim for as long as he wanted because identity theft was not a federal crime at that time—before filing for bankruptcy, also in the victim’s name. While the victim and his wife spent more than four years and more than $15,000 of their own money to restore their credit and reputation, the criminal served a brief sentence for making a false statement to procure a firearm, but made no restitution to his victim for any of the harm he had caused. This case, and others like it, prompted Congress in 1998 to create a new federal offense of identity theft. What are the most common ways for criminals to steal your identity? According to the Department of Justice,3 “Many people do not realize how easily criminals can obtain our personal data without having to break into our homes. In public places, for example, criminals may engage in “shoulder surfing”—watching you from a nearby location as you punch in your telephone calling card number or credit card number—or listen in on your conversation if you give your credit card number over the telephone to a hotel or rental car company. Even the area near your home or office may not be secure. Some criminals engage in “dumpster diving”—going through your garbage cans or a communal dumpster or trash bin—to obtain copies of your checks, credit card or bank statements, or other records that typically bear your name, address, and even your telephone number. These types of records make it easier for criminals to get control over accounts in your name and assume your identity. If you receive applications for “preapproved” credit cards in the mail, but discard them without tearing up the enclosed materials, criminals may retrieve them and try to activate the cards for their use without your knowledge. (Some credit card companies, when sending credit cards, have adopted security measures that allow a card recipient to activate the card only from his or her home telephone number but this is not yet a universal practice.) Also, if your mail is delivered to a place where others have ready access to it, criminals may simply intercept and redirect your mail to another location.In recent years, the Internet has become an appealing place for criminals toobtain identifying data, such as passwords or even banking information. In their haste to explore the exciting features of the Internet, many people respond to “spam”—unsolicited e-mail—that promises them some benefit but requests identifying data, without realizing that in many cases, the requester has no intention of keeping his promise. In some cases, criminals reportedly have used computer technology to obtain large amounts of personal data. With enough identifying information about an individual, a criminal can take over that individual’s identity to conduct a wide range of crimes: for example, false applications for loans and credit cards, fraudulent withdrawals from bank accounts, fraudulent use of telephone calling cards, or obtaining other goods or privileges which the criminal might be denied if he were to use his real name. If the criminal takes steps to ensure that bills for the falsely obtained credit cards, or bank statements showing the unauthorized withdrawals, are sent to an address other than the victim’s, the victim may not become aware of what is happening until the criminal has already inflicted substantial damage on the victim’s assets, credit, and reputation. This happened to me. I had an insect control guy in my home. He found a credit card slip on the kitchen counter of my home. Within a month, I had several thousand dollars of unauthorized charges on my credit card. I had the Secret Service in my home conducting an investigation. It was very unpleasant. Identity theft has become such a big problem, that it’s worth further discussion. What Can You Do to Avoid Identity Theft? Over 49 million people were victims of identity theft or fraud in 2021 for an astounding $56 billion. The following will help you protect yourself and your investments from this kind of crime. 1. Rarely give out any personal data or even credit card information to anyone unless you have a very good reason to trust that person. 2. Never give out information that the company should already know. Thus, if you have a password for your online banking or you need a pet’s name, the bank employee shouldn’t be asking you for these personal items. This should be in the bank’s database. Likewise, you should almost never give out your social security number to anyone. Many doctors routinely ask for your social security number. I think they do this in order to track you down if you don’t pay the bill. I never give out my social security number. I only give my health insurance group number. 3. According to the Department of Justice, if someone you don’t know calls you and offers you a prize or credit card and wants personal information such as a social security number, ask to be sent a written application. Moreover, check with the company that called you in order to verify that it really is offering you what it purportedly says it does. Double-check that the application is going to the organization that called you. 4. When you give someone a credit card number while you’re traveling, such as a hotel clerk, make sure that no one is looking over your shoulder. Also, don’t give credit card information or personal information over any phone while you’re in a public spot such as an airport. I have heard folks doing this. I could have easily written down their credit card number while they were talking. 5. Check your credit information monthly. I subscribe to a credit information reporting service and monitor my credit. This service also looks for new accounts that might be established in my name. Although I use MYfico.com, there are other services such as freecreditreport.com and even Lifelock that place a fraud alert on your credit report every 90 days. Since I am not familiar with Lifelock or freecreditreport.com, I can’t specifically endorse them. You would have to check them out for yourself. 6. Read over your credit card statements carefully. Too many of us do not read these statements as carefully as we should. Always look for unauthorized transactions. Some crooks charge only one or two minor things each month in the hope of not being noticed. 7. If someone has managed to make unauthorized charges on your credit card or has taken money from your bank, you need to contact the credit card company or financial institution where you bank immediately and report the transaction. You would then place a fraud alert with your bank and all credit reporting agencies and cancel any credit cards that have been compromised. If you are a victim of credit card or identity theft, here is what to do. First contact the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to report the situation.To report identity theft go to www.identitytheft.gov and fill out the form. You will be given some easy to follow prompts. In addition, the Department of Justice notes that you should contact the fraud units of the three principal credit reporting companies either through their repective websites or via phone/mail information below. For Equifax: 1. To report fraud, visit equifax.com, call (888) 685-1111, or write to P.O. Box 740256, Atlanta, GA 30374-0250. 2. To order a copy of your credit report, write to P.O. Box 740241, Atlanta, GA 30374-0241, or call (800) 685-1111. 3. To dispute information in your credit report, call the phone number provided on your credit report. 4. To opt out of preapproved offers of credit and marketing lists, call (888) 567-8688 or write to Equifax Options, P.O. Box 740123, Atlanta GA 30374-0123.For Experian (formerly TRW): 1. To report fraud, visit experian.com, call (888) EXPERIAN or (888) 397-3742, fax to (800) 301-7196, or write to P.O. Box 9554, Allen, TX 75013. 2. To order a copy of your credit report, write to P.O. Box 2104, Allen TX 75013, or call (888) EXPERIAN. 3. To dispute information in your credit report, call the phone number provided on your credit report. 4. To opt out of preapproved offers of credit and marketing lists, call (800) 567-8688 or write to P.O. Box 919, Allen, TX 75013. For TransUnion: 1. To report fraud, visit www.transunion.com, call (888) 909-8872, or write to P.O. Box 2000, Chester, PA 19022. 2. To order a copy of your credit report, write to Annual Credit Report Request Service, P.O. Box 105281, Atlanta, GA 30348. 3. To dispute information in your credit report, call the phone number provided on your credit report. 4. To opt out of preapproved offers of credit and marketing lists, call (800) 680-7293 or (888) 5OPTOUT or write to P.O Box 505, Woodlyn, PA 19094. You are legally entitled to one free copy of your credit report per year. Visit AnnualCreditReport.com for more information. Contact all creditors with whom your name or identifying data have been fraudulently used. Contact all financial institutions where you have accounts that an identity thief has taken over or financial institutions that have been created in your name but without your knowledge. You may need to cancel those accounts, place stop-payment orders on any outstanding checks that may not have cleared, and change your automated teller machine (ATM) card, account, and personal identification number (PIN). Contact the major check verification companies if you have had checks stolen or bank accounts set up by an identity thief. In particular, if you know that a particular merchant has received a check stolen from you, contact the verification company that the merchant uses: 1. ChexSystems—(800) 428-9623 (closed checking accounts) 2. CrossCheck—(800) 552-1900 3. Equifax—(800) 378-4329 4. National Processing Co. (NPC)—(800) 720-3323 5. VENMO—(855) 812-4430 Some insurance companies for a small fee will provide identity theft protection. They not only will insure you for damage, but they will provide a person to handle your case and perform on your behalf many of the steps that I noted above.Identity theft, as well as all other scams, can be avoided by paying attention to your surroundings, using common sense, and doing your research on the individual and/or company before you make a purchase or investment. Hopefully this information will prevent you from becoming another statistic and should make your life less taxing. People who struggle with their taxes fall into two categories: men and women. The 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act is the most significant revisions to U.S. tax law in decades. The Republican bill, passed along party lines, was so rushed—the Senate initially passed it like a thief in the nightliterally at 2 a.m.—that there were no real debates and no public hearings, which is NEVER a good thing. Legislation such as this should be transparent and should, at the very least, involve public hearings from experts. As a result of the less than ideal circumstances of its compilation and passage, there are numerous badly written and confusing provisions that will take years for the IRS to clarify. In the meantime, there will be many mistakes made by taxpayers and even tax preparers. So to help you from falling victim to the law’s unintended and mostly undesirable consequences, we’ll take a deeper look at the TCJA’s changes. .This chapter takes a closer look at the changes[em dash]and the consequences of those changes—resulting from the passage of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA), the most significant tax law changes in decade9Tax Changes for Individuals Found in the TCJA Tax Rate Under the TCJA most people found their their tax burden reduced, apart from those in the middle class earning less than about $250,000, or those in high-income tax states and who pay a lot of property tax. These people were the losers in this legislation and probably pay more in federal and possibly state taxes since they lost all deductions for state and local taxes that exceed $10,000. This probably resulted in their not itemizing their deductions, which means that they don’t even get the benefit of the allowable $10,000 state and local tax deduction cap. The obvious winners , however, were those in the 35 percent tax bracket and above—those whose taxable incomes are over $400,000 married filing jointly or over $200,000 and are single. Please see Appendix A for the tax rates for 2022. Doubling of Standard Deduction but Elimination of Exemptions1 Under the prior law, you could deduct up to $4,100 per person as an exemption and would have gotten a standard deduction of $6,350 for single people and $12,700 for married filing jointly. Under the TCJA, the standard deduction almost doubled—$12,950 for single people and $25,900 for married filing joint returns. This sounds wonderful EXCEPT that all exemptions for the family (with the exception for those who are blind and over age 65) were eliminated. Example: John and Mary have two kids. They live in a state that has moderately high income taxes and pay out $12,000 in property taxes. Under the prior law, they would get $12,700 in a standard deduction, $16,400 in exemptions, and probably could deduct part of their state and local taxes as an itemized deduction. Under the current law, they get no exemptions, they get $25,900 of a standard deduction and probably won’t be able to itemize since their standard deduction will exceed their allowable itemized deductions because of the disallowance of state and local taxes. Sandy’s hot tip: One of the best tax strategies mentioned in this book is to hire children in your business. This strategy became even better under the TCJA since their standard deduction that can be used against wages increases from $6,350 to $12,950. Thus, you can pay your kids up to $12,950 tax free if these wages are reasonable for what they do. Increase in Child Tax Credit2 To help offset the loss of itemized deductions, Congress increased the child-care credit from $1,000 to $2,000 per qualifying child under age 17. In addition, a $500 credit is provided for certain non-child dependents. The yearly overall cap per family is $5,000. Even better, up to $1,400 of this credit is refundable for each qualifying child. This means that if you didn’t owe enough taxes, you can get this excess back as a refund! This is designed to especially help poorer people. What Congress gives it tends to take back. This credit phases out for single taxpayers earning over $200,000 and for married filing joint taxpayers who earn over $400,000. Sandy’s opinion: I never thought it was good tax policy to simply give credits to people to have more children. This doesn’t create jobs or improve the economy. This is an example of a political move that doesn’t have much economic sense. It was put in, however, to help ameliorate the detrimental effects on the middle class of eliminating exemptions and itemized deductions. Elimination of State and Local Taxes above $10,0003 All state and local taxes above $10,000 were eliminated under the TCJA. This applies to all state and local taxes such as state income tax, property tax, and sales tax. Sandy’s elaboration: Frankly, this $10,000 allowance is illusory for most people since they probably won’t itemize deductions because of the doubling of the standard deduction. Remember, you can only take itemized deductions that exceed the standard deduction. Sandy’s hot tip: While the state sales tax deduction is eliminated, it is only eliminated for personal property not used in a trade or business. If the property such as a car or desk is used in a trade or business, you can deduct the sales tax as a business expense to the extent the property is used for business. Also, state property taxes, even above $10,000, would be partly deductible on your Schedule C if you claim a valid home office deduction as a self-employed business owner or as an independent contractor. There are many subtle changes in the TCJA One change involves reducing the way inflation is computed. While I won’t get into the technical details of this, what it means to you is that it reduces what is known as “tax bracket creep.” This means that as people earn more money, they tend to eventually reach higher tax brackets unless the brackets are adjusted for inflation. Thus, reducing the inflation effect on tax brackets will result in more people at the lower end of the income scale having to pay more in taxes in the future instead of less. Think tanks have estimated that by 2027, if no changes occur, everyone earning under $75,000 will pay more. Kiddie Tax Modified5 In most areas of tax law, people are taxed on their earnings. Thus, if I earn $5,000, I am taxed on the earnings. The kiddie tax was a major and, in my opinion, stupid departure from this principle. Children who are under age 24, who are full-time students and unmarried, can only earn roughly $2,300 of unearned income taxed at their tax bracket. Anything above that was taxed at the highest bracket of their parents. If the children were not full-time students or got married, then the kiddie tax only applied if they were under age 18. The TCJA makes it clear that earned income is taxed to the child at the single taxpayer rates. However, unearned income, which includes interest, dividends, rents, and capital gains, is taxed at the highest rates in the Internal Revenue Code (IRC), which is the trust tax rate. Sandy’s hot tip: If you have kids subject to the kiddie tax, you want to keep their unearned income at no more than $2,300 to take advantage of the trust tax rate of 10 percent. Also, the kiddie tax will not apply to earned income at all. Casualty Losses Eliminated Except for Federally Declared Disaster Areas6 If you have an uncompensated losses arising from fire, storm, shipwreck, weather (such as a hurricane or tornado), earthquake, theft, etc., you used to be able to deduct this loss as an itemized deduction. Under the TCJA, casualty losses incurred before January 1, 2026, are no longer deductible UNLESS they arise in a federally declared disaster area. Sandy’s elaboration: Thus, unless you are in a federally declared disaster area, you can’t deduct damage from fire, theft, tornadoes, hurricanes, or earthquakes. I STRONGLY recommend that you reevaluate your property insurance coverage on everything that you own to be sure you are covered as much as possible. To maximize reimbursements from your insurance carrier, be sure to video record all your items in your home and those used for business too. If it involves electronic equipment or furniture, be sure to dictate any serial numbers into the recording. Thus, if your house or business is burglarized, you can trace your equipment. Gambling Losses and Expense Limits Are Modified7 “Do you like to gamble?” If so, the Tax Code makes a distinction between professional gamblers who do this full time versus recreational gamblers. If you are a professional gambler, you can generally deduct your losses that exceed your income on Schedule C as with any business loss. HOWEVER, if like most of us, you are simply a recreational gambler who gambles occasionally, you must first report ALL of your gambling winnings. You can, however, deduct your gambling losses BUT only to extent of your winnings as an itemized deduction. Thus, if you don’t itemize, you can’t deduct any gambling losses! The good news, however, is that you can take gambling losses from any type of gambling. Example: John wins the Powerball lottery and wins $5,000,000. However, he has gambled in Las Vegas and lost $10,000 on the slot machines and $50,000 betting on horses. He can deduct the $60,000 of losses from other types of gambling as an itemized deduction. Sandy’s note: If you think that you qualify as a professional gambler, check with a good financial professional to ensure that this is the case before you deduct your gambling losses on Schedule C. Modification of Home Mortgage and Home Equity Interest Deduction8 Prior to the TCJA, you could deduct home mortgage interest on up to $1 million of debt if used for either the acquisition or improvement of your principal or secondary residence. In addition, you could claim an interest deduction on up to another $100,000 of home equity debt. For years beginning after December 31, 2017, and continuing to January 1, 2026, the deduction for home equity indebtedness is suspended. In addition, the deduction for home mortgage interest is allowed up to $750,000 of debt. However, a taxpayer who purchased a residence before April 1, 2018, was considered to incur acquisition indebtedness prior to December 15, 2017. Sandy’s hot tip: If you are eligible for a valid home office deduction, you could deduct a portion of the interest as a business expenses. Your deduction for interest on debt might NOT be limited to $750,000 of debt to the extent that the home is used for business. Example: Let’s assume that you bought a castle for $48 million, paying $8 million as a down payment and borrowed the rest of the $40 million. If you use your home 25 percent for business, you should be able to deduct the interest on 25 percent of the debt, which is the interest on $10 million, regardless of the debt limitation. Charitable Contributions Deduction Limitation Increased9 Prior to the TCJA, you were only able to get a deduction for cash contributions if the amount contributed was less than 50 percent for public charities and 20 to 30 percent for private charities. In addition, for contributions of $250 or more you needed to get an acknowledgment from the charity to substantiate the contribution. Under the TCJA, cash contributions made before January 1, 2026, are subject to 60 percent of your adjusted gross income (AGI). This also applies to certain private foundations. No Deduction for Amounts Paid for College Sports Tickets10 Prior to the TCJA, some colleges required a “contribution” to the university to be able to buy sports tickets. The payor could claim, under some circumstances, 80 percent of the payment as a charitable contribution. The TJCA eliminated this deduction as a charitable contribution if the payor receives any right to purchase tickets or seating at an athletic event. Alimony Deduction Eliminated and No Income Inclusion by Payee11 Prior to the TCJA, you could deduct payments that qualified as alimony to your spouse. The spouse would have to pick up these payments as income. Now, for any divorce or separation agreement executed after December 31, 2018, or executed before that date, but modified after it, alimony is no longer be deductible by the payor spouse. Also, alimony is not includible in income of the recipient spouse. Elimination of Miscellaneous Itemized Deductions Prior to the TCJA, you could deduct certain nonbusiness deductions as miscellaneous itemized deductions that were subject to a threshold of 2 percent of your adjusted gross income (AGI). You were able to deduct things like tax preparation fees, safety deposit boxes, investment journals, and employee business expenses. The TCJA suspends all miscellaneous itemized deductions until January 1, 2026. Sandy’s elaboration: Since the TCJA was ushered through Congress like a thief in the night, with no public hearings or discussion, there will be unintended consequences. Accountants will be finding unintended problems for years. Hobbies One area where the TCJA has wrought unexpected detrimental effects: hobbies. If you start a business and it generates a loss, you could use that loss against any current earnings. Any excess loss could then be carried forward for an indefinite carryforward up to 80 percent of any future taxable income. If, however, the endeavor doesn’t rise to the level of a business and is considered a hobby (which people won’t know until they get audited), the deductions are now disallowed since miscellaneous itemized deductions are eliminated. Thus, the big change that can result from eliminating miscellaneous itemized deductions is that all deductions from hobbies would seem to be eliminated but the income would seem to be fully taxed. The same can be said about gambling expenses and losses. Example: I start up a company to make money raising dogs or horses or a network marketing distributorship. I gross $3,000 in the first year but have $6,000 in deductions. If my company doesn’t rise to the level of a business but is deemed to be a hobby, the result is that I will be taxed on the full $3,000 of gross income and get no deductions at all. YUCK! This could stifle people from trying to start businesses. At least if they didn’t do it correctly, they could have taken deductions in the past up to their income from the endeavor, which results in “no gain and no foul.” This is an example of what happens when there are no hearings and no discussion on legislation. Hopefully, this will either be clarified by the IRS or Congress will enact some fixes to this legislation. Qualified Bicycle Commuting Exclusion Suspended12 Prior the passage of the TCJA, an employee could exclude up to $20 per month in qualified bicycle commuting reimbursements. Under the TCJA, this exclusion is suspended until January 1, 2026. Sandy’s hot tip: Despite the elimination of this exclusion, bicycles used in a trade or business are depreciable. Thus, if you have a newspaper route and are treated as an independent contractor, you can depreciate the bicycle to the extent it is used for business. In addition, while employees would have to pay tax on any bicycle reimbursement by the employer, the employer can deduct qualified bicycle payments up to $20 per month, which is up to $240 per year. Exclusion for Moving Expense Reimbursement Suspended13 Prior to the passage of the TCJA, employees could exclude qualified moving expenses reimbursements from their gross income and from their wages. This exclusion for qualified moving expenses reimbursements is suspended until January 1, 2026, with an exception for members of the Armed Forces on active duty and for their spouses and dependents who move pursuant to a military order and incident to a permanent change of station. Moving Expense Deduction Suspended14 Prior to the passage of the TCJA, employees could claim a deduction for moving expenses incurred in connection with starting a new job if they met certain distance requirements. This deduction for moving expenses incurred in connection with starting a new job is suspended until January 1, 2026, with an exception for members of the Armed Forces on active duty. Sandy’s elaboration: I think it is sad that Congress would get rid of the small bicycle deduction used for commuting and the moving expense deduction to give people who earn over $400,000 a tax break. Repeal of Obamacare Individual Mandate15 Under the law before the passage of the TCJA, the Affordable Care Act (ACA, aka Obamacare) required individuals who were not covered by a health plan that provided at least minimum essential coverage to pay a penalty when filing their federal tax returns. With the TCJA, this penalty was reduced to zero, and this repeal of part of the ACA was made permanent. Sandy’s elaboration: The point of this is that with fewer people not being required to obtain coverage, this would mean that more people would not meet the rules to obtain subsidized coverage since they would either drop out or obtain disqualifying coverage that doesn’t meet the minimum standards for the subsidy. The TCJA did keep the 3.8 percent surcharge on net investment income for high-income individuals and the 0.9 percent additional Medicare tax, both enacted by Obamacare. Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) Retained with Higher Exemptions16 The Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) is a tax system that is separate from the regular tax system. The AMT is intended to prevent higher-income taxpayers from avoiding all tax liability by using various deductions, exclusions, and credits. The exemption amounts for individuals prior to passage of the TCJA: i. For married filing joint taxpayers, $86,200 ii. For single individuals, $55,400iii. For married filing separately, $43,100. The exemption amounts for individuals following passage of the TCJA, beginning on January 1, 2018, and ending before January 1, 2026, increase. The exemption amounts for individuals are: i. For joint returns and surviving spouses, $109,400 ii. For single taxpayers, $70,300 iii. For married filing separately, $54,700 Also, the above exclusions are reduced by 25 percent over the following phased-in amounts: i. For joint returns and surviving spouses, $1 million ii. For all other taxpayers, other than for estates and trusts, $500,000 Sandy’s elaboration: I like this change. The AMT hits people without their knowledge until they file their tax return. Frankly, though, eliminating the AMT altogether would have made filing a tax return simpler. ABLE Account Changes17 ABLE accounts are little-known accounts that are used to fund tax-preferred savings accounts to pay for the support, education, and maintenance of individuals with severe disabilities and their families. Prior to the TCJA, the annual contribution limitation was the amount of the annual gift tax exemption, which in 2022 was $16,000. Effective for tax years beginning after the enactment date of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and before January 1, 2026, the limit on the annual contribution has been increased. Once the annual exclusion has been reached, the ABLE account’s designated beneficiary can contribute an additional amount, up to the lesser of (a) the federal poverty line for a one-person household, or (b) the individual’s compensation for the tax year. Expanded Use of Section 529 Plan Funds for Private School tuition18 Prior to the TCJA, funds in a Section 529 plan account could only be used for qualified higher-education expenses. These included college and graduate school costs for tuition, fees, books, supplies, and required equipment, as well as reasonable room and board if the student was enrolled at least half time. Eligible schools included colleges and universities, vocational schools, or other post-secondary schools eligible to participate in a student-aid program of the Department of Education. For distributions made after December 31, 2017, the TCJA includes up to $10,000 of tuition at an elementary or secondary public, private, or religious school. Sandy’s note: Thus, if you want to send your kids to a great private school or want to send them to a religious-oriented school, you can do so and use up to $10,000 of Section 529 fund money each year to do so. Student Loan Discharged on Death or Disability19 Gross income generally includes any discharge from indebtedness of a taxpayer. An excep tion to this rule is that gross income does not include any amount from the forgiveness ofcertain student loans if the forgiveness is contingent on the student’s working for a certain period in certain professions, such as teaching in underprivileged areas and working in public service. Starting after December 31, 2017, and extending until before January 1, 2026, certain student loans that are discharged because death or total and permanent disability of the student are also excluded from gross income. Sandy’s observation: It’s nice of Congress to care about dead or severely disabled kids. It’s too bad that they don’t care as much while these kids are alive. Student Loan Forgiveness Under the 2022 Inflation Adjustment Act Under the 2022 Inflation Adjustment Act, federal student loans can be forgiven up to $10,000. If, however, you have received a Pell Grant that was normally given to lowincome student, the amount of forgiveness is up to $20,000. However, Congress generally doesn’t pass favorable laws without some catch. Here are the catches: a. Only federal loans can be forgiven and NOT those from private lenders. Sorry. b. You must earn under $125,000 of adjusted gross income if you are single or under $250,000 if married filing a joint tax return. Sandy’s elaboration: Even better, while student loan forgiveness is normally taxable, under the earlier American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, any student loan forgiveness between 2021 and 2025 is TAX-FREE for federal income tax!!! Yay!! However, some states do NOT always follow the federal rules, and you should check with your accountant about state tax implications if your student loans are forgiven. Estate and Gift Changes20 Prior to the TCJA, the first $5 million adjusted for inflation was exempt from estate and gift tax. For people who die after 2017 and for gifts made after 2017, and before January 1, 2026, the TCJA doubled the base estate and gift tax exemption from $5 million to $10 million, which is indexed for inflation occurring after 2011. As a result of inflation, the exemption in 2022 is $12.06 million per person, and both the husband and wife each qualify for this exemption. Sandy’s elaboration: Each spouse thus gets his or her own exemption. This means that the exemption for a married couple will be $24.12 million. Small Business Tax Changes Found in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act Corporate Tax Rates Reduced21 Prior to the TCJA, corporations were subject to graduated tax rates from 15 percent on the first $50,000 to a maximum rate of 35 percent on taxable incomes over $10 million. Personal service corporations paid a flat 35 percent tax on all their income.The TCJA reduced the corporate tax rates to a flat 21 percent. For large corporations having over $1 billion in revenue, there is a new 15 percent minimum tax. Thisminimum tax probably doesn’t apply to you, but it could affect stock market prices since public corporations may pay more taxes. Sandy’s elaboration: This is the only thing that I actually liked in the TCJA. Corporations have been leaving the U.S. to go elsewhere and avoid all tax on foreign income. A favorite place where they tend to relocate to is Ireland, which has a corporate tax rate of 12.5 percent. Thus, reducing the corporate rates might make companies reconsider leaving the U.S. and provide more dividends to stockholders and higher earnings. Frankly, I wish Congress lowered the tax rates even lower to compete more successfully with places like Ireland and not increase the child credit. However, I do NOT agree with the Republican argument that lowering corporate taxes improves hiring. In fact, corporations used the newly found money from the tax savings to buy back stock. Sandy’s elaboration: The TCJA really gives bigger benefits to operating as a regular corporation. In addition, the pass-through tax deduction that applies to S corporations, sole proprietors, and partnerships doesn’t really match the beneficial tax rates of being a regular corporation. I will be discussing the pass-through tax deduction below. Pass-Through Tax Deduction for Small Business22 Prior to the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, small businesses, such as self-employed taxpayers, partnerships, and S corporations, paid tax on their net income from the business as a pass through. They used the normal tax rates like the ones posted above. Because of the TCJA, small business taxpayers, which include independent contractors, an reduce their net income by 20 percent. This doesn’t apply to any capital gains earned by the business, but does include Real Estate Investment Trust (REIT) dividends. This discount applies to their Qualified Business Income (QBI). QBI is defined to be from items of income, gains, deductions, and losses related to any qualified trade or business that is effectively connected to a trade or business conducted in the U.S., plus certain REIT dividends less any capital gains or other investment income, such as interest. (See IRC Section 199A.) Sandy’s note: Effectively, the 20 percent pass-through deduction allows small businesses who operate as a pass-through entity to only be taxed on 80 percent of their net business income (not counting investment income). Moreover, the 20 percent deduction specifically doesn’t reduce your adjusted gross income (AGI). Instead, it is used in computing taxable income. Congress did this so that small business taxpayers would pay the full amount of Social Security and Medicare tax without taking this deduction into account. Sandy’s note: What Congress gives, it tends to take back. As noted above, this nice 20 percent deduction for Qualified Business Income (QBI) becomes limited if your qualified business income is more than $340,100 (married filing joint filers) and $170,050 for everyone else. Here are the limitations: The first limitation applies if you’re single and earn more than $170,050 or you’re married and earn more than $340,100. In this case, you can’t deduct more than the greatervalue of either 50 percent of your W-2 wages or the sum of 25 percent of your wages plus2.5 percent of your depreciable property. By the way, this wages-based limitation will mean that high-income sole proprietors, partnerships, and real estate investors without W-2 employees will miss out on the deduction unless they form an S corporation. (Again, this logic sort of matches the old IRC Section 199A deduction just mentioned.) Example: Suppose you have $1 million of qualified business income and you’re potentially entitled to a $200,000 deduction. If your business’s wages equal $300,000 and you hold no depreciable property, you can only deduct $150,000 because 50 percent of $300,000 equals $150,000. The second limitation is that this 20 percent deduction is phased out based on income for specified service businesses or where the principal asset of the business is the reputation or skill of one or more of its employees (whatever this means). Thus, the 20 percent pass through deduction may not apply to financial service companies, law firms, medical firms, dental firms, athletes, consulting firms, actuarial firms, and those in the performing arts. For some reason, engineering firms and architectural firms are not subject to this limitation. This is important since the deduction for service businesses completely phases out if their taxable income is $50,000 over that of a threshold amount for single taxpayers and $100,000 for taxpayers who file joint returns. The threshold amount is $340,100 for joint filers and $170,050 for everyone else. Thus, if you file jointly and have a taxable income over $440,100, or if you are single and have a taxable income over $220,050, and you are one of the specified service businesses, you don’t get this 20 percent deduction. If you earn between $340,100 and $440,100 (married filing jointly) or between $170,050 and $220,050 (and single), you get part of the deduction. If you earn less than the threshold amounts, you get the full 20 percent deduction on taxable income not counting capital gains or reasonable salaries. Sandy’s note: IRS has stated that realtors are not considered brokers within the definition of specified service businesses. Thus, realtor firms do not have to worry about the problems arising from being a specified service business. Insurance professionals would likewise not be deemed to be conducting a specified service business regarding insurance sales other than sales of securities. Sandy’s elaboration: What this means in plain English is that for businesses other than specified service businesses, the deduction will be capped at 50 percent of wages or 25 percent of wages, plus a bit extra if you have a lot of equipment and/or furniture in your business, whichever is higher. This benefits manufacturers and hotel owners and others who use a lot of tangible property over that of service businesses such as doctors and lawyers. People like former president Trump and former senator Corker make out well here. Who would have known that becoming president could save you a bundle in taxes? If your business is a “specified service business,” this limitation potentially eliminates the deduction for you if you earn $50,000 more than the $170,050 threshold for all individual taxpayers who do not file joint returns or $100,000 more than the $340,100threshold (for married filing joint taxpayers). Finally, if your taxable earnings are lessthan these threshold amounts (you earn less than $340,100 of taxable income and are married or you earn less than $170,050 of taxable income and are single), you are eligible for the full 20 percent pass-through deduction, regardless of your type of business. Thus, the limitations don’t apply if your taxable income (not counting this deduction) is less than these shold amounts. Sandy’s note: This tax deduction will certainly encourage more people to become business owners. I can see many people trying to “game” the system by being treated either as an independent contractor or by forming their own corporation. While I do appreciate the attempt by Congress to benefit small businesses, I see a lot of problems with having two different tax rate systems: one for small businesses and one for employees. In addition, the way this is determined is complicated and adds a great deal of complications to the tax return. If a small business didn’t need an accountant before, it will surely need one now. I can assure you that if you have any business or real estate investment ownership, you won’t be filing your tax return on a postcard-sized form. There is a lot of complexity to this new law. My final problem with all this is that I can see a LOT of people gaming the system and trying to classify themselves as independent contractors, thus increasing the deficit way beyond projections. Prior to the passage of the TCJA, corporations that received dividends from other corporations were entitled to a deduction for dividends received. If the receiving corporation owned at least 20 to 80 percent of the dividend-paying corporation, an 80 percent dividends received deduction was allowed. Otherwise, the dividends received deduction was 70 percent for ownership interests of less than 20 percent. Under the TCJA, the 80 percent dividends received deduction is reduced to 65 percent, and the 70 percent dividends received deduction is reduced to 50 percent because of the lower corporate rates. Alternative Minimum Tax Repealed for Corporations24 Prior to the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, corporations were subject to an alternative minimum tax (AMT) of 20 percent with a $40,000 exemption. Under the new Tax Cuts law, the corporate AMT was repealed permanently. As a result of the subsequent Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 (IRA), very large public companies whose gross income exceeds $1 billion are not be subject to a 15 percent alternative minimum tax. This probably doesn’t affect most of you, but it could impact stock market prices. A taxpayer can either depreciate equipment used in a trade or business or elect to write it off in one year. Prior to the TCJA, the amount that could be expensed was $500,000. Under the TCJA, for property placed in service after December 31, 2022, the maximum amount that taxpayers can expense has been increased to $1,080,000 and phases out if equipment purchases exceed $2.7 million. In addition, the items that can be expensed has been expanded to include depreciable tangible personal property used primarily to furnish lodging and certain improvements in nonresidential real property, such as roofs, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning property, fire protection and alarm systems.Sandy’s elaboration: The benefits of being able to use the expense deduction on certain tangible property that provides lodging and for nonresidential real property will be a big boon to investors in commercial real estate and even for investors in residential property. It certainly will help former president Trump with his hotels. Luxury Automobile Depreciation Limits Substantially Increased26 Prior to the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, cars had some limits on yearly depreciation. This is one of the better changes in the tax law. It substantially increases the yearly vehicle depreciation for vehicles used in business. To give you an illustration of how good this new law is for vehicles, if you purchased a $50,000 luxury car such as a BMW, it would have taken you about 18 years to write it off. However, under the new law, the same $50,000 car would take about 5.2 years!! I can just see the luxury car dealers advertising, “buy a BMW, Mercedes, or Cadillac and eliminate your taxes.” Sandy’s tip: You can take bonus depreciation up to $8,000 on new and used passenger cars, thus making the maximum first-year depreciation up to $19,200. HOWEVER, there is an unforeseen tax trap in doing this. You won’t get any depreciation until year 7, in which you can write off the rest of the business usage. I, therefore, don’t recommend that you take bonus depreciation on passenger automobiles. Only use it on equipment, qualified SUVs, and vans. Computers and Peripheral Equipment Not Listed Property27 Listed property is a special classification for assets that lend themselves to both personal and business use. It involves things like computers, peripherals, and cars. It requires more strict depreciation than if it weren’t listed property and it can’t be expensed unless business use exceeds 50 percent.Under the TCJA, computers and peripherals were removed from the definition of listed property, which is good news. What this means to you is that you don’t need to use computers more than 50 percent for business to qualify for accelerated depreciation or even to expense the business portion of the computer. Example: I use my newly purchased home computer 40 percent for business. I can thus either elect to write off 40 percent of the cost in one year or take accelerated depreciation on 40 percent of the cost. In addition, there is less-restrictive record keeping for computers too. See your accountant about this. Temporary 100 Percent Cost Recovery for Certain Qualifying Business Property28 Prior to the passage of the TCJA, taxpayers were allowed an additional bonus depreciation of 50 percent of the property’s adjusted basis if it was new to the taxpayer and had its original use by the taxpayer, which means it wasn’t purchased as a used item. The TCJA allows for 100 percent bonus depreciation for the adjusted basis of the property if it was placed in service after September 27, 2017, and before January 1, 2024. There is a phasedown of the bonus depreciation starting in 2023 to 80 percent. In 2024, the bonus depreciation will be 60 percent. In 2025, the bonus depreciation drops to 40 percent, and in 2026 it drops to 20 percent. Sandy’s elaboration: A big winner will be qualified new sports utility vehicles (SUVs). Normally, these can only be written off up to $25,000 of the business use. However, using 100 percent bonus depreciation allows a complete write-off of the business use of a new SUV. This becomes just as good as a new qualified truck, which is also 100 percent deductible. Modification of Net Operating Loss Deduction If you have a non-corporate business that generates a loss, prior to passage of the TCJA, you could use any business loss against any form of income including wages, rents, pensions, and a spouse’s earnings. If the loss exceeded this year’s income, you would get to carry it back up to two years and offset that last two years of taxes. This allowed businesses which had losses to be able to get cash for their losses and use this cash immediately when they needed it. If the losses exceeded the last two years of income, you could carry the loss forward up to 20 years. The TCJA somewhat changes this. Taxpayers can still use losses from a business against any other form of income. However, if the losses exceed the other income for the year, you no longer get to carry back losses except for losses incurred in the trade of business of farming, the losses from which can be carried back up to two previous years. Losses not used in the year of the loss against other income and incurred after December 31, 2017, get an unlimited carryforward but can only be used up to 80 percent of taxable future yearly income. Example: Kim operates a network marketing business that generates a $10,000 loss. if she has $50,000 of earned income from a job, she can offset that income by the $10,000 loss and only pay tax on $40,000. If , however, she had no income this year to offset, she can carry the loss forward forever using it against up to 80 percent of yearly income until the loss is used up. Sandy’s elaboration: However, if you are in the business of farming, you can carry back any unused losses up to two years. I guess Congress likes farmers. Like-Kind Exchanges Limited to Investment Real Estate Prior to the TCJA, a non-taxable like-kind exchange was available for real estate and for tangible personal property. Therefore, there was no gain or loss when you traded in your car, since it is treated as a like-kind exchange. Under the TCJA, like-kind exchange treatment is only available for real property that is not held primarily for sale. Tangible personal property no longer qualifies as like-kind propertSandy’s elaboration: This change has some major implications. For example, if you trade in a vehicle that you use for business, some gain or loss might be recognized upon the exchange. Employer’s Deductions for Meals and Entertainment Limited Prior to passage of the TCJA, taxpayers were able to take clients out to a business lunch and deduct 50 percent of the cost of the meal. This also applied to fun types of entertainment such as golf, movies, plays, and sporting events. In addition, companies could provide employee outings and parties and write off 100 percent of the cost for the parties if they only invited employees and/or members of their families. Under the TCJA, amounts paid or incurred for the above-noted types of entertainment are disallowed other than for some meals. Sandy’s elaboration: This is a very big deal that at the time escaped the notice of most media. Small businesses normally don’t market on major events such as the Olympics or the World Series. They don’t even usually market on television. They market using “bellyto-belly” marketing. Thus eliminating the deductions for entertainment, such as golf, is a major deal for small businesses. They probably will still incur this type of expense, but they won’t be able to deduct it. However, the deduction for business meals, such as at a restaurant with a prospect, is allowable pursuant to a recent IRS notice. Thus, if you discuss business at a restaurant and document this discussion correctly, you should be able to get a 100 percent deduction for meals up to December 31, 2022. After December 31, 2022, the meal deduction drops to 50 percent unless Congress extends this changAlso, meet with your tax professional before you take the position about deducting meals. In addition, there are other types of meal deductions still allowed:Business gifts: Business gifts are still deductible up to $25 per person, per year. Gifts to organizations in which there is no named person to use the gift are also 100 percent deductible. Employee achievement awards are not allowed under the TCJA. I should note that IRS has said that gifts of meals are NOT deductible unless the business owner or a business employee is present when the gift is made. Thus, mailing a year-end candy basket to clients aren’t deductible. If however, you were present and had a business discussion at the same time that you gave your prospect or client the candy basket, it would be deductible up to $25.Business meals with clients or prospects are 100 percent deductible if they are ordinary and necessary to your business, and are not lavish and you or an employee of your company are present during the business discussion in which the meal occurred. You also need to document this correctly in a good tracker, as noted in Chapter 2. Also, the meals must be purchased in a restaurant to receive the 100 percent deduction. If they aren’t purchased from a restaurant, the deduction becomes 50 percent.All food and prizes for open houses are 100 percent deductible.All food served at a business seminar is 100 percent deductible by the seminar promoter.All food served at a sales presentation, such as an opportunity meeting, is 100 percent deductible.Any food served on the premises of an employer through an eating facility that meets the requirements for de minimis fringes is 100 percent deductible.Meals furnished by the employer to keep employees on premises for emergencies or because there are no nearby restaurants in which the employee can get lunch and get back on time should be 100 percent deductible.Meals bought while on business travel can be reimbursed by the employer.Meals treated as compensation to employees are deductible.Meals served to employees and stockholders at business meetings are100 percent for 2021 and 2022. After 2022, it will drop to 50 percent unless Congress extends this.Meals and other expenses directly related and necessary to the attendance of business meetings of certain charitable organizations, such as business leagues, chambers of commerce, real estate boards, and boards of trade, are 100 percent deductible.Expenses of goods and services made available to the general public, such as food served in an open house or at an opportunity meeting, are 100 percent deductible. Expenses for goods or services sold in a bona fide transaction for full consideration in money or money’s worth would be 100 percent deductible. Key: To be eligible for the 100 percent deduction for meals, as noted above, instead of 50 percent, the meals must be purchased at a restaurant. You can eat the food anywhere, but meals must be purchased at a restaurant and supported by receipts showing where the meals were purchased. No Deduction for Amounts Paid for Sexual Harassment Subject to Nondisclosure Agreement31 No deduction is allowed for any settlement, payout, or even attorney fees related to sexual harassment or sexual abuse if such payments are subject to a nondisclosure agreement. New Credit for Employer-Paid Family and Medical Leave For wages paid in tax years beginning after December 31, 2017, the new Tax Cuts and Jobs Act law allows businesses to claim a general business credit equal to 12.5 percent of the amount of wages paid to qualifying employees during any period in which such employees are on family and medical leave (FMLA) if the rate of payment is 50 percent of the wages normally paid to an employee. The credit is increased by 0.25 percentage points (but not above 25 percent) for each percentage point by which the rate of payment exceeds 50 percent. All qualifying full-time employees must be given at least two weeks of annual paid family and medical leave (all less-than-full-time qualifying employees must be given a commensurate amount of leave on a pro rata basis). (See Code Sec. 45S, as amended by Act Sec. 13403.) Cash Method of Accounting Prior to passage of the TCJA, businesses that were required to use inventory or were corporations could only use the cash method of accounting (treats income when received and gets deductions when paid) if their gross income was under $5 million (if inventories were involved, the gross receipts test was under $1 million), otherwise the accrual method of accounting was mandated. This required all businesses to report income when it was earned (such as when you sent out your bill) and they could only take deductions when all events were fixed and clear as to what they must pay. Under the TCJA, businesses that have gross receipts under $25 million can use the cash method of accountinSandy’s elaboration: Frankly, the accrual method was a real pain since you might have to claim as income items those owed to you even if you didn’t get the cash yet. Tax Planning The TJCA, being the biggest tax reform legislation in recent years, created a lot of tax planning opportunities. Here are just a few: 1. Use a corporation as a tax shelter. Corporations are taxed at a flat rate of 21 percent. This is a far cry from the top individual rate of 37 percent. Reclassifying yourself as a corporation and having your “client(s)” pay the corporation can save a bundle. Also, although the corporation can subject you to double tax: tax at the corporate level and tax to you as a dividend, this can be avoided with good planning. Even if there is double tax, the sum of the corporate tax plus the tax on dividends is still less than the top tax rate for individuals. Finally, you can keep the money in the corporation and wait until you die. Obviously, this isn’t my favorite technique. However, upon death, your heirs get a step up in basis for the corporate stock and can liquidate the corporation and receive the proceeds tax free. 2. Reclassifying as a contractor. Instead of being a highly paid employee, simply quit and get treated as a contractor. There are some legal hoops to go through, but this could be possible. This will allow you to use the 20 percent pass-through deduction. 3. Fire all employees and hire robots. I am not kidding here. President Trump promised to create more jobs. However, he didn’t finish the sentence. The full promise under this law is to, “create more jobs for robots.” Robots are considered tangible business property if used in the business, and 2.5 percent of their cost counts in increasing the limitation for the 20 percent pass-through deduction. Also, you don’t need to pay them salary or benefits. This will be a big boon to manufacturing firms such as automakers. 4. Incorporate your business if you would be deemed a “specified service business.” If you are earning more than $440,100 and are married filing joint returns or earning more than $220,050 and you are a single or head of household taxpayer, you won’t get any benefit from the 20 percent pass-through deduction. Thus, you might want to incorporate and get taxed at the 21 percent rate for any monies left in the corporation. In addition, you avoid Medicare taxes on monies left in the corporation and not paid out in salaries. 5. Max out your deductions with a good tracker. Because of passage of the TCJA, most people have seen an increase in their state taxes because the deductions in most states are similar to what the federal deductions were. Thus, people have fewer deductions for state taxes, but the state rates are the same. Thus, you have a wider base for taxation without a drop in the rates. Maximizing your deductions becomes even more important. Moreover, you might also want to keep track of nondeductible expenses too. This will help prove that you are operating your business like a business and not like a hobby. Hobbies get no deductions under the TCJA but are taxed on the income. Ouch! 6. Consider giving appreciated property to your parents. Right now, if you own property such as a principal home, you can get a $250,000 exclusion from gain if single or $500,000 of gain if married. However, to get this benefit, you must live in and occupy the residence for at least 2 out of the last 5 years. If you don’t meet these rules, you generally must pay tax on all gain unless you can show a hardship such as job change, mandatory sale, etc. Vacation home sales are fully taxable as are investment property sales. However, if you were to transfer real estate or even stocks to parents who die, your basis, as a result of inheritance, is the full fair market value upon their death! Thus, you get a big step up in basis. Even better, with the substantial increase in the estate tax exemption to 12.06 million dollars per person, you can do this with a lot of property, with no estate or gift tax. However, while this has some amazing estate and income tax implications, it can pose some problems from an elder law perspective. For example, you would have to be sure that you get the property back from your parents in their will or trust and that any siblings will agree to this. Also, if your parents get sued or need nursing home care, any assets in their name can be attached. Thus, you need to see a good elder law or tax law professional before you implement this strategy. The new law eliminates the deduction for entertainment except for meals incurred in operating a trade or business. It is uncertain whether meals served in a restaurant are deductible, even if they are incurred primarily for business. We think they are, but this area may need a ruling from the IRS. See your tax professional about this. IRS Notice 2018-76. 31. IRC Section 162, as amended by Act Section 13310. 32. IRC Sections 448 and 471, as amended by Act Section 1310. 21 The Top 10 Tax Questions The questions answered in this chapter have universal appeal, have been asked numerous times at my seminars, or are very interesting. I hope you enjoy reading them as much as I’ve enjoyed answering them. Question Number 10 “I have heard that the penalties for not having medical insurance or for not having “minimum essential coverage has been repealed. Do I need to pay any penalty if I didn’t have insurance?” Sandy’s Answer: Due to the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA), there is no longer a penalty for being without minimum essential health insurance coverage. Question Number 9 “I have been told that I can deduct up to $25,000 of rental property losses that might exceed rental property income and use those losses against any other form of income, such as my wages. Is this true? Also, I am a part-time property manager (working about 300 hours per year). I heard that being in real estate or property management can allow me to take all the rental loss deductions without limit and regardless of income. Is this true?” Sandy’s Answer You’re asking a very good question that affects a lot of people. For many years, real estate investors were allowed to deduct all rental property losses. Real estate was the best legal tax shelter available. Starting in 1987, Congress limited rental property losses to rental property income and other passive income. However, there are two littleknown exceptions. The first exception, which you noted in your question, applies to real estate professionals. If you’re in the business of real property development, construction, acquisition, management, leasing, or sales and you meet two tests, there are no limits to being able to use rental property losses. In fact, if you’re in any of the occupations listed, your real estate losses are deductible against any other form of income, with no limitation. However, to meet this exception, your real estate business must meet either of the following two tests:You perform more than half your business working hours in the real estate business.You perform more than 750 hours of this type of work during the year. Since it seems that you do not meet either of these tests, you do not qualify for the real estate professional exception. However, you may qualify for the second exception. If you actively manage your real estate investments—such as making the management decisions of approving tenants, deciding on rental terms, and approving repairs and improvement expenditures—and your income is under a certain ceiling (this is the congressional “gotcha”), you can deduct up to $25,000 of rental property losses against any other form of income. The ceiling for that maximum loss allowance is an adjusted gross income (AGI) of $100,000 for either single or joint filers or $50,000 for married filing separately. If your AGI is over $100,000, the maximum gets phased out by $1 for every $2 that you earn over $100,000. But you can carry over to future years any remaining unused losses; the same limits apply. You also can use the losses against any gains from the sale of rental property. Let’s take some examples. Example: David and Kari earn $120,000 AGI together. They have substantial rental losses that exceed their rental income. Since they earn over $120,000 AGI, they may only use $15,000 of the losses against their wages (the $25,000 maximum less 50 percent of the $20,000 excess AGI over $100,000). They can carry over the remaining unused losses, subject to the same limits. Example: Deb and Donald earn $180,000 AGI and also have the same amount of rental property losses. They may not use any of the rental losses above their rental income because their AGI exceeds $150,000, which is the top for the phaseout ($25,000 less 50 percent of the $80,000 excess AGI over $100,000). Question Number 8 Here is a vital question dealing with pension distributions. If you terminate your relationship with your company and you get your vested pension in cash, this question and answer will save you a bundle! “I got a pension distribution made to me when my job got terminated. If I want to avoid any gains, I was told that I would have to roll over the contribution to my IRA within 60 days of receipt of the distribution to avoid all gains. The problem is that my company took out 20 percent of the distribution as a withholding for the IRS pursuant to IRS requirements. What do I do now? I can’t roll over the withheld amount.” Sandy’s Answer You’re right in noting that you have to pay tax on all pension, 401(k), and IRA distributions (other than the new Roth IRA) if you don’t roll over the distribution within 60 days to another qualified plan or IRA. If this isn’t painful enough, you also could be hit with a 10 percent penalty if you’re younger than 591⁄2. Because the distribution was sent to you, the prior plan trustee must withhold 20 percent of the distribution. Your only choice is to contribute other money to the IRA to make up for the withholding. You would therefore not be taxed on any of the distribution and will get a refund of all withholding. The better solution, which is too late for you, would have been to require the plan trustee to directly roll over the funds to your IRA and not to distribute the money to you. In this way, you would have avoided withholding. Question Number 7 This question does not have universal appeal. However, as you’ll see, I had fun with the answer. “I have begun a photo enhancement/alteration service in which I can turn any ‘would have been a good shot if only’ photo into something worth displaying. My biggest target markets are the consumers and business providers of the equestrian (horse) industry. Currently, I have a display at the public stable where my horse resides. If I display it on my horse’s stall door, can I deduct my monthly board that I pay to keep the horse there? I view this as being similar to taking a home office deduction for displaying products and services in a home office.” Sandy’s Answer This is a great question. I met a couple on my travels who were “equine expression specialists.” I wonder if that was you and your wife. As for your question, the home office rules are very specific. They apply only to a residence that you live in. Thus, unless you live with your horse — and I doubt that your horse is cute enough to warrant this —the home office rules are not applicable. Having a display at a public stable probably wouldn’t alone allow for a deduction of the boarding fee of the horse; you probably could get a display posted even if your horse weren’t there. You may, however, be able to deduct the stable fee if you run your horse business like a business and not just “horsing around” like a hobby. The following are some factors that the IRS would look for:Do you race or breed your horse?Are you making money?If you’re not making money, what steps are you taking to make money?What consultants or specialists have you used?What training have you attended? If you’re considered to be running your horse business as a business, this could be a “horse of a different color” as far as the IRS is concerned. Question Number 6 If you own some investment property, such as rental property, you’ll find this question and answer very useful. “I currently own some houses that I rent out. I want to sell the houses but don’t want to pay tax on the sale. I guess I want to have my cake and eat it too. Any suggestions, Sandy?” Sandy’s Answer You can indeed avoid all capital gains on your real estate by structuring a like-kind exchange. This is where you trade one investment property for another. You may trade an apartment building for land or a commercial building for residential rentals, etc. The exchange must, however, be investment property for investment or commercial property. You can’t have a like-kind exchange for your residence. Moreover, you cannot receive anything in exchange, such as cash or other property, or you may have to recognize gain to the extent of the other property received. ln addition, you don’t even have to know which property you want to receive in the exchange. You can have a deferred exchange, where you would identify the property that you want within 45 days of the contract and then acquire the replacement property within 180 days of the contract. Check with your accountant and a good realtor who specializes in this type of transaction. Note: Only the real estate qualifies for a like-kind exchange. Personal property located in real estate do not qualify.Question Number 5 This question is for you “party animals.” It involves entertainment and alcohol. “I am having a business party in my home. I will be following your advice about sending out an announcement that I am celebrating 10 years in business and will have displays of what I do. I intend to serve alcohol, and in my state, there is a special alcohol tax like a sales tax. Can I deduct the cost of the alcohol just like deducting food, and can I deduct the tax?” Sandy’s Answer Alcohol is treated like any other beverage. It would be as deductible as food. The tax on the alcohol also would be deductible, as would any tax on food. However, under the new law, entertainment deductions are eliminated. However, there is an old saying,“Where there is a will, there is a lawyer.”Make sure that your food and drink are served as part of a sales presentation to customers. If so, you could potentially deduct up to 100 percent of all food and drink. Cha, cha cha. Question Number 4 This question will have universal appeal. It deals with the issue of when you can start taking business deductions. This is a vital issue for all new businesspeople. “I just bought some investment real estate. It’s in bad shape and needs some work. When can I start deducting the depreciation and maintenance on the property? Also, my wife is opening up a restaurant. When can she start deducting expenses related to the restaurant?” Sandy’s Answer These are good questions that apply to many small businesses. You’re deemed to be in business and therefore able to deduct business expenses when you’re open for business. Thus you must be able to sell services or products or take customers. It’s at this point that any reasonable business expenses that you incur become deductible. In your real estate investment business, you would reach this point when your property becomes habitable, and you start advertising for a tenant. In your wife’s restaurant, she would reach this point when she is able to accept customers. Some businesses, however, incur some expenses before they open the business, such as investigation expenses, legal and accounting fees incurred for the startup, copyrights, etc. These would be nondeductible. However, where there’s a will, there’s a lawyer. The IRS gives you an out. You may elect to amortize your preopening expenses over a period of at least 60 months. You must, however, elect to do so on your tax return. See your accountant about making a protective election for your startup expenses. Question Number 3 I get this question a lot. Network marketers in particular frequently ask it. It applies, however, to any business. It entails one of the biggest myths that surround the tax law. “I am in the network marketing business. I have some losses in my business during my first two years of operation. My accountant told me that I have to have a profit for three of the last five years in order to take the losses, so he won’t allow me to deduct these losses against my salary. Is this true?” Sandy’s Answer You need to get a new accountant immediately. As for needing a profit in three of the last five years, this is probably the biggest myth in tax law. Rightfully, you want to be construed as a business and not as a hobby. The implications are enormous. If you’re in business, you get to deduct all ordinary and necessary business expenses on a dollar-for-dollar basis. In addition, if your expenses exceed your income, you will have a tax loss that you can use against any form of income, such as wages, dividends, and pensions. You can even use it against your spouse’s earnings. Example: Scott earns $40,000 in salary from his job. If his side business generates a $10,000 loss, he may offset the salary with the loss and pay tax on only $30,000. If the loss from your business exceeds your yearly income, you offset your current income with the loss. If the loss exceeds your current income, you carry forward the loss against future income and use it up to 80 percent of taxable income. This loss never expires until you use it up. If you’re a hobby, however, all expenses seem to be disallowed under the new law yet you must report your income from the hobby! Thus, there is no loss to use or to carry over to the future. Thus, you never want to be classified as a hobby. The Internal Revenue Code notes that if you have a profit for three of five consecutive years (two of seven for businesses involving horses), you’re presumed to be a business. However, even if you don’t have the necessary profit in the three years, you can still have many years of losses if you run your endeavor with a reasonable expectation of profit. There are a number of factors that the courts use in making this determination. One of the biggest and most important factors is whether you have a business plan. This is a five-year projection of income and expenses. The projection should at some year show a profit. I cannot overstate the importance of this. You also should have a marketing plan built into your business plan to show your projected marketing activities. Another factor is documentation. Businesses have correct detailed records. Businesses keep tax diaries. Hobbies do not.You also should work your business regularly. This means at least 45 minutes per day, four or five days a week. It’s much more beneficial in establishing a business motive to work a business four hours a week than to put in eight hours in one week and none in the second week. Business owners go to training that should be documented. In addition, if business owners don’t have a profit in one year, they don’t repeat the same mistakes. Insanity is expecting different results from doing the same thing from year to year. Business owners change marketing strategies if they don’t work and they consult with experts. There’s much more that I can add to this answer, but it should give you a good review of what’s necessary. See also the in-depth discussion of this subject in Chapter 8. Question Number 2 This question deals with a major issue that is misunderstood nationwide. There are millions of people who take out home-equity loans unnecessarily because they don’t understand this issue. “I am self-employed and use the IRS mileage deduction for my vehicle. Therefore, I do not deduct gas, insurance, repairs, etc. However, my question is whether I can take the interest deduction incurred on my car loan and deduct a percentage for business.” Sandy’s Answer This is a great question and an example of one of the biggest misunderstandings in the tax law. You’re allowed to deduct your car interest and/or sales tax to the extent that you use your car for business. Thus, if you use your car 80 percent for business, you can deduct 80 percent of the year’s interest and 80 percent of any taxes incurred on the car for that year. This point is also true regardless of the method that you use to deduct your car, whether it’s the IRS mileage approach or the actual expenses (such as deducting gas, repairs, insurance, etc.). Sadly, many people don’t understand that you can deduct interest on car loans to the extent that the vehicle is used for business. Thus they take out home-equity loans to accomplish this. This could be a bad mistake. If they fail to pay off the loan, they could lose their home. Moreover, homeequity loans do not provide deductible interest under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. If you use a loan to purchase a car, this would reduce the available amount of the loan that you could use for other purposes. I should note that employees who don’t have a side business cannot deduct the interest and taxes incurred on their vehicles. You must use a car in business to get this benefit.Question Number 1 This is the question I get most frequently. Someone asks this question on my Web site, www.taxreductioninstitute.com, almost every week. If you have a network marketing business, you probably have wondered about this yourself. However, this question also would apply to other businesses, such as franchises, where there may be a minimum purchase requirement. “I have a multilevel marketing business. I am required to purchase $100 a month of product in order to receive any check. May I deduct the cost of this required monthly purchase?” Sandy’s Answer In my opinion, and that of IRS personnel with whom I spoke, you cannot deduct your monthly purchases. The reason is that these items usually can be resold, so they would be nondeductible inventory, or you probably consume the products monthly, which would make these purchases personal and nondeductible. However, as I’m fond of saying, “Where there’s a will, there’s a lawyer.” There are a couple of ways that would entitle you to get a deduction for these purchases. One way is to give them away to prospects as samples. You would have to note in your diary answers to the following questions:Who did you give the product to?What did you give?When (the date) did you give it?How much did it cost?Why did you give it (such as for samples or demonstration)? If you write down the answers to these questions, you may deduct your monthly purchases to the extent that you gave the products away as samples. This all needs to be well documented in a tax organizer. A second method is to sell the products. As I mentioned, they’re considered inventory, so they’re not deductible until they’re sold. The third method is to donate them to charity, such as to your local college or religious organization. You then would take a charitable deduction for the donation as a nonbusiness deduction. Don’t forget to get a receipt from the charity! There are tax professionals who disagree with my opinion on this issue. Their reason is that there is no case or IRS ruling on this issue. In addition, requiring product purchases in order to receive a check seems like it is ordinary and necessary to the network marketing business. I should note that this answer to question 1 is my opinion; however, it is also the opinion ofIRS personnel whom I have questioned. If you try to take this deduction, be prepared to have to fight with the IRS about this issue. Who knows? You may win the case, and I can cite you in forthcoming books! In the 2012 American Taxpayer Relief Act, there is a littleknown provision for donating food inventory. If you have food, such as diet bars and shakes that if properly labeled in accordance with federal and state rules and qualifies as inventory, your deduction to a qualified charity that donates food to the needy or sick, would be what you paid for the food plus one-half of the appreciation. Thus, if you purchased food bars for $2 that have a retail value of $3 and you meet the donation rules, you would qet a charitable deduction of $2.50, which is your basis plus one-half of the gain. If you are a retailer of food, or wholesale supplier, you might benefit from this provision. How to Find a Good Accountant The question that I get asked most frequently at seminars is, “How do I find a good accountant?” Sadly, it is very tough finding the right, knowledgeable accountant. First, not all accountants specialize in taxes. Many accountants perform audits, computer studies, and the like. Second, many accountants are timid! They would love for you to send in 100 percent of your income (less their accounting fee). Accordingly, there are some questions that you can ask in order to see if an accountant is right for you. Here are some suggestions: 1. What designations or credentials do you have? Look for enrolled agents (people who pass a special IRS examination), certified public accountants, ex-IRS agents, attorneys, etc. I like preparers with legal backgrounds, because they tend to be more aggressive. 2. Are you in practice full time? Hopefully, the answer will be yes. 3. How many years’ experience do you have in tax practice? You don’t want a rookie experimenting on you! 4. Do you prepare all returns by computer? Handwritten returns ended with the ’80s. 5. What are your fees, and do you have a written fee schedule? Cheaper is not necessarily better. You may get what you pay for! 6. Can you provide references from other businesses similar to my own? Many accountants, rightly, don’t give out names of clients. However, all firms should have some happy clients who will be willing to speak to you. When you call 319them, ask them, “What do you like about the accountant?” and “What would you improve about his/her services?” 7. Do you use any checklists to maximize my deductions? 8. Test your accountant. Tell him/her that in a tax reduction book and seminar it was suggested “to hire your spouse and make that person the primary insured so you can deduct medical insurance premiums and set up a self-insured medical plan.” Ask what the accountant thinks of this strategy. 9. Do you teach any tax courses, or have you written any tax publications? The more, the better. 10. Are you conservative, aggressive, or somewhere in the middle? 11. What review process do you use in order to ensure a quality product? 12. May I look at your tax library? Accountants need to look things up. The more sources, the better. They should have at least two separate tax research sources. 13. Do you specialize in taxes? They should say yes! 14. What percentage of your practice relates to taxes? What other accounting services do you personally perform? 15. What is your attitude toward tax audits? Unfortunately, many tax preparers recommend not taking legitimate tax breaks at all if it could possibly trigger an audit. These accountants are a “hazard to your wealth.” 16. How do you treat gray areas? The best advisors will tell you that the area is gray and give you your options. Stay away from advisors who say, “The area is not clear, so don’t take the deduction.” 17. What do you do after tax season? You want to hear that he/she does other accounting work and also does marketing for new clients. 18. How often do you take tax courses? 19. Have you ever been disciplined by the IRS or any accounting society? If an accountant refuses to answer this question or acts insulted, forget it! 20. How many other clients like me do you have? You don’t need hundreds, but more than 10 would be helpful. 21. Do you offer pre-year-end tax planning as part of your tax service? If so, is there an extra fee for this? 22. Do you offer any tax planning during the year? 23. How soon do you return calls from clients? 24. Give me a tax-planning tip based on a recent tax change that may benefit me. If you need a firm to represent you before the IRS, as a rule, the firm’s “track record” is the best objective indicator of how that firm will manage your case. Listed below are some of the additional key questions to be addressed: 25. How many years has the firm been in business? 26. Has the firm been designated as a Certified Tax Resolution Specialist? 27. Does the firm discuss all options available to the taxpayer to resolve their tax problem? 28. How many Offers in Compromise has the firm successfully settled? 29. What is the firm’s success rate—total dollars negotiated in settlements divided by total dollars in tax, interest, and penalties owed? 30. What is the firm’s rating with the Better Business Bureau? 31. What is the firm’s Credit and Financial rating with Dun and Bradstreet? Finally, there are certain other areas of concern that you should watch for in order to avoid unscrupulous firms. They are:Beware of organizations and telemarketers that are paid on an incentive basis for bringing your business to their firm.Be especially aware of unrealistic promises or improbable results. You want to be sure that you receive top-quality work and that you get the services that you pay for. I would avoid any firm that promises you that you will only have to pay pennies on the dollar to the IRS without first scrutinizing your complete financial situation.Beware of firms that charge you a fee exclusively based on the amount of money that you owe the IRS. Usually, the same amount of work is required to solve both large and small tax obligations.Ask the tax resolution firm direct questions about your case. If the firm is evasive or if their answers seem intentionally complex or unclear, it is possible that they are trying to cover up information about your representation or quality of service that they may or may not provide. You deserve straightforward answers. Conclusion These questions may not be all-inclusive. However, they will certainly “separate the wheat from the chaff ” and enable you to make much better decisions as to whether an accountant is right for you! Appendix C Health Savings Account Overview: A health savings account (HSA) requires a trust to be set up for paying qualified medical expenses. The contributions are deductible, and the payments for these qualified medical expenses are tax-free. Qualifying: You must use the HSA proceeds for qualified medical expenses. In addition, you must have a high deductible medical policy. You can’t have another medical plan that covers your deductibles. Thus, if you have a plan, such as Aflac, that pays for sickness and injuries, this may disqualify your HSA. However, you can have a plan that pays for specific types of diseases such as cancer, and you can have a plan that pays for daily stays in hospitals. In addition, you can have a self-insured medical plan, flexible spending account, or cafeteria plan in addition to the HSA if these plans have at least the same deductibles as the HSA. Observation: In my opinion, the self-insured medical plan is still the better option since you don’t need a high-deductible policy, don’t need to set up a trust with yearly fees paid to financial institutions, and don’t have any dollar limitations on contributions other than the fact that the payments must be reasonable for the hours and work performed. An HSA, however, might be advisable if you are single and don’t have a C corporation or you don’t want to hire your spouse in your business in order to utilize the benefits of the self-insured medical plan for yourself. Frankly, I have an HSA setup for my family that works very well.